Mallard BASIC 


For the Amstrad PCW8256/8512 & PCW9512 


LOCOMOTIVE Introduction 
SOFTWARE and Reference 


Mallard BASIC 


Introduction 
and Reference 


The world speed record for a steam locomotive is held 
by LNER 4-6-2 No. 4468 “Mallard”, which hauled 
seven coaches weighing 240 tons over a measured 
quarter mile at 126 mph (202 kph) on 3rd July 1938. 


LOCOMOTIVE 
SOFTWARE 





© Copyright 1987 Locomotive Software Limited 
All rights reserved. 


Neither the whole, nor any part of the information contained in this manual may be 
adapted or reproduced in any material form except with the prior written approval of 
Locomotive Software Limited. 


While every effort has been made to verify that this software works as described, it 
is not possible to test any program of this complexity under all possible 
circumstances. Therefore Mallard BASIC is provided ‘as is’ without warranty of any 
kind either express or implied. 


The particulars supplied in this manual are given by Locomotive Software in good 
faith. However, Mallard BASIC is subject to continuous development and 
improvement, and it is acknowledged that there may be errors or omissions in this 
manual. 


Locomotive Software reserves the right to revise this manual without notice. 


Written by Locomotive Software Ltd and Ed Phipps Documentation Services 
Produced and typeset electronically by Locomotive Software Ltd 
Printed by Grosvenor Press (Portsmouth) Ltd 


Published by Locomotive Software Ltd 
Allen Court 

Dorking 

Surrey RH4 1YL 


2nd Edition Published 1987 (Reprinted with corrections May 1989) 
ISBN 185195 009 5 


Mallard BASIC is a trademark of Locomotive Software Ltd 
LOCOMOTIVE is a registered trademark of Locomotive Software Ltd 
AMSTRAD is a registered trademark of AMSTRAD plc 

IBM is a registered trademark of Intemational Business Machines Corp 
CP/M-80, CCP/M-86 and MP/M-86 are trademarks of Digital Research Inc 
MS-DOS is a trademark of Microsoft® Corporation 

VT52 is a trademark of Digital Equipment Corp 





Preface 


This book describes how to use Locomotive Software's Mallard BASIC 
interpreter to write and use BASIC programs on your Amstrad PCW. 


BASIC was originally designed many years ago as a programming 
language that was simple to learn, as an aid to teaching computer 
programming. There are now many versions of BASIC, developed from 
this original. 

Mallard BASIC is a powerful modern BASIC with a number of significant 
improvements. In particular, Mallard BASIC has a very unusual facility 
(for BASICs on microcomputers) for indexing data stored in a file, and 
automatically keeping this index in alphabetical order. This is a very 
useful facility to have in a program that works with a database. 


BASIC is very versatile and can be used to perform most tasks involving 
manipulating numbers and text. The simplest use of BASIC is as a 
sophisticated calculator, but you can quickly move on from this to using 
BASIC to write programs. Programs can perform an infinite range of tasks, 
from simple things such as totalling sequences of figures to complex tasks 
such as maintaining a personnel file, calculating payrolls or performing 
statistical analyses. 


You can use programs written by others (of which a wide range are 
available) or write your own, once you have learned how to program. 


The copy of BASIC on your CP/M disc is set up ready for use on your 
machine. To use it, you just have to load CP/M and type the command 


BASIC (Retay]. You then have access to all the facilities of BASIC 
described in this manual — including the screen-based editor which 
displays your program lines as you change them. 


About this manual 
This manual is designed to help you use Mallard BASIC. It is divided into 
two parts: 


Part I: A gentle introduction, suitable for new users including those 
who have never written a computer program before. 


Part II: A reference section containing a detailed description of all 
the facilities of BASIC. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 





The Introduction takes the user from using BASIC as a simple calculator, 
through writing simple programs (for example, to print the result of a 
simple calculation), to preparing fully-featured programs that manipulate 
complex data files. The Reference section describes BASIC in detail. It is 
aimed at experienced users who have used other BASICs before or who 
have read and understood the Introduction. 


Many of the operations described in this manual are concerned with 
manipulating numbers and text, but not all. For example, we show you how 
to position the cursor on the screen or clear the screen and how to control 
the printer from your program — setting the page length, positions of tabs 
and even resetting the printer from inside your BASIC program. 


We also show you how to incorporate machine language routines in your 
program and how to call up external routines, such as those within the 
operating system itself. For example, we show you how to use these 
techniques to generate graphics effects by using GSX, the graphics 
extension to CP/M. 


If you are entirely new to BASIC 


Start by reading through the Introduction, working through the examples 
on your computer as you do so. You may, if you wish, just read up to the 
end of Chapter 5 if you don't want to work with files initially. By the end of 
the Introduction, you should be able to write simple but useful BASIC 
programs with occasional help from the Reference section. 


To discover how to use the full range of facilities offered by Mallard 
BASIC, you should then read Part II. Although Part I covers the most 
useful facilities of BASIC, it does so at the fairly elementary level, with the 
emphasis on understanding rather than complete technical detail. Part II 
gives the definitive description of Mallard BASIC. 


If after reading Part I you need more help to understand programming, you 
should turn to one of the many excellent tutorial texts that are available. 
Ask your dealer for details. 


If you have programmed in BASIC before 


You probably won't need to read Part I in any detail, except perhaps for 
Chapter 7 which describes the very powerful Keyed File Handling 
(JETSAM) provided by Mallard BASIC. Concentrate instead on the 
Reference section which is intended to describe Mallard BASIC, fully and 
accurately. This includes in Chapter 10 the formal specification of each of 
the commands and functions in keyword order. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 





Different versions of Mallard BASIC 


Mallard BASIC is available in different versions for use with different 
operating systems working on different processors. In particular, there are 
separate versions for 8-bit processors like the Z80 and 8080 (Mallard-80), 
for 16-bit processors like the 8088 and 8086 (Mallard-86); and there are 
multi-user versions of Mallard-86 for use on networks of 16-bit machines. 
There are also Run-Only versions available. 

Part I of this manual is tailored to the version of Mallard BASIC supplied 
on the Amstrad PCW machines, but Part II can be used with any version of 
Mallard BASIC. However, you should note that a few of the commands 
only have an effect in certain versions. Where this is the case, this is 
mentioned in the text. 


At the time of printing, the following versions are available: 


8-bit Single User version (Mallard-80) 
for CP/M 2.2 and CP/M Plus 


16-bit Single User versions (Mallard-86) 
for MS-DOS version 1 
for MS-DOS version 2 and above 
for CP/M-86 
16-bit Multi-User versions (Multi-User Mallard-86) 
for MS-DOS 3.2 and above with MS-NET 
for TurboDOS 
for Concurrent CP/M and Concurrent DOS 


Note that Multi-User versions are only available for 16-bit machines. 


Conventions 


Throughout this description of BASIC, various conventions are used to 
represent different types of information. The principal conventions are as 
follows: 


INPUT, PRINT, etc. 

The names of BASIC's commands and functions INPUT, PRINT etc.) are 
shown in this manual in capital letters. They are also always displayed in 
capitals when programs are listed. It does not matter whether you type 
these names as capitals or as lower case letters: they are automatically 
converted to capitals when BASIC stores the program. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 





see GOTO, see FIND$, etc. 
Further information is given where the given topic (GOTO, FIND$ etc.) is 
described. Use the index to find the relevant page to look at. 


text in this style 
This style of text is used to indicate something to type or something 
displayed on the screen, in order to distinguish it from descriptive text. 


descriptions-in-italic 

Italic text is used for descriptions of the type of information that is 
required, rather than the information itself. For example, number could be 
1 or 2 or 3 etc. If the description of a single item is more than one word 
long, the words are joined by hyphens: for example, line-number. 


The majority of descriptions are explained in the accompanying text. The 
remainder are self-explanatory. The common descriptions are listed in the 
introduction to Chapter 10 in Part II, the overview of BASIC's commands 
and functions. 


[items in slanted brackets] 

Slanting brackets round an item are used to show that this item is optional. 
Normally, including the item and omitting the item produce different 
effects. The brackets themselves should always be omitted. 


, Cc. 
These graphics are used to represent individual keys on the keyboard. For 
example, represents the Return key — not the letters RETURN. 


(Additional conventions used in the Reference Section are described at the 
beginning of Part IT.) 





Mallard BASIC; Introduction 


Part I 
INTRODUCTION 





Mallard BASIC 


CONTENTS 


1. 


1.1 
LZ 
L.3 
1.4 
iS 
1.6 


2. 


Del 
Date 
2.3 
2.4 


3 


S.1 
B.2 
at 
3.4 


4 


4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 


Starting with BASIC 


Entering BASIC 

Leaving BASIC 

Using BASIC 

Giving BASIC commands 
Types of information 
Chapter review 


Starting programming with BASIC 


A first program 

More complex programs 
Changing a program 
Chapter review 


Real programming 
Designing programs 
Getting information 

How information is stored 
Outputting the results 


Building larger programs 
Compartmenting a program 
Sequences and loops 

Making decisions 

Stopping the program 
Organising the program 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


NWNnNNR rH = 


11 
12 
14 


15 


ihe 
16 
20 
ay 


37 


37 
38 
40 
44 
45 








Diss 
idk 
an 


6.1 
6.2 
6.3 


Fal 
Tal 
Teo 
7.4 
is 
7.6 
ye 
7.8 


8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 


Manipulating information 


Manipulating numeric information 
Manipulating textual information 
Converting between different types of information 


Using discs for information storage 


General disc commands 
Sequential access files 
Random access files 


Keyed access files for data bases 


Writing a program that uses Keyed files 
Working out the main program 
Preparatory stage 

Adding a record 

Reading a record 

Deleting an entry 

Closing the Keyed file 

Enhancements 


Machine level operations 


General information 

Applying a patch 

Loading a machine code program 
Using a machine code program 


53 


bs 
56 
39 


61 


62 
63 
76 


89 


91 
92. 
93 
95 
99 
101 
103 
105 


115 


115 
116 
117 
119 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 1 
Starting with BASIC 





This chapter tells you how to load BASIC and use it as a simple calculator. It also 
introduces many concepts that are helpful to know before you start programming in 
BASIC. 


1.1 Entering BASIC 


To use BASIC, load CP/M as described in the PCW User Instructions and then: 


Type BASIC 
After a few seconds, the screen should display a message confirming that BASIC 
has been selected, similar to the following: 

Mallard-80 BASIC with Jetsam Version n.nn 

© Copyright 1984 Locomotive Software Ltd 

All rights reserved 

nnnnn free bytes 


Ok 
If this message is not displayed, check your typing and that you have inserted the 
right disc the right way round. : 


Once this message is displayed, you have access to all the facilities of BASIC. 


1.2 Leaving BASIC 


If you want to use a different language or application, you must leave BASIC and 
return to the computer's operating system. You can either re-boot your computer or 
use the BASIC SYSTEM command, as follows: 


Type SYSTEM 
A> 
Before you can use BASIC again, you must enter it as described above. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 1 





Chapter 1: Starting with BASIC 


1.3 Using BASIC 


Although BASIC is a programming language, it can also be used as a very 
powerful calculator. Using BASIC as a calculator provides a gentle introduction to 
many of the fundamental concepts you will need to understand before you can 
begin to program. 





The rest of this chapter introduces you to using BASIC in this way. Using BASIC 
for programming is described in the next chapter. 


1.4 Giving instructions to BASIC 


To get BASIC to do anything, you must tell it what to do, by typing instructions for 
it to obey. An instruction starts with a word that has a special meaning to BASIC, 
called a ‘command’, which may be followed by information used by that command, 
and is finished by pressing [RETRY]. 


Commands are one of the group of words and symbols that have a special meaning 
to BASIC called the 'BASIC keywords’. Although you can type them using capitals 
or small letters, they will always be shown as capitals in this book to help you pick 
them out (they are also always displayed in capitals whenever you examine your 
programs). 

Commands are rather like the verbs in an English sentence: they indicate an action. 
There are a wide variety of commands, which will be introduced over the next few 
chapters. One of the simplest to understand is PRINT. This command tells BASIC 
to display the information contained in the rest of the instruction — to 'print' it on the 
screen. 


The information part of a command is rather like the object in an English sentence: 
it tells the computer what to apply the command to. In the case of PRINT, it tells 
the computer what to display. 


Thus, to get BASIC to print the number 42 on the screen: 
Type PRINT, 42 


command information 


Note that BASIC does not try to obey the instruction until you complete it by 
pressing [RETRY]; until then, you are free to alter what you have typed, by deleting 
characters with the character delete key and retyping. 


You should note from the outset that like most other computer facilities, BASIC 
will only recognise commands if you spell them correctly. Misspelt commands will 


2 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 1: Starting with BASIC 


normally produce a message from BASIC such as ‘Syntax Error’. If you get an 
unexpected message of this sort, for now just check your typing and try again. In 
particular, make sure that you leave a space between the command and any 
information following it. 


Another useful and simple command is DIR, which behaves almost exactly as the 
operating system command of the same name. For instance, to list the names of all 
files on the currently selected disc: 


Type DIR 


1.5 Types of information 


The information part of an instruction can take a wide variety of forms, as follows. 


1.5.1 Fixed information (constants) 


The simplest type of information to understand is that already used in the PRINT 
example above. 


PRINT, 42 
command constant (number) 


In this, a number has been specified by typing it in the instruction. This type of 
information is called a ‘constant’, because its value is fixed — obvious from the 
instruction. Constants can either be numbers (such as 42, 0.0000002, 
—11111111111) or ‘text strings’ (such as "Hello", "Returns for tax year 87/88", 
"42"): 
Type PRINT, "Hello, gentle readery 

command constant (text string) 


Note that text strings must be surrounded by the double quote character ("). 


1.5.2 Varying information (variables) 


A second type of information is called a ‘variable’. A variable is a name for an item 
of information rather than the information itself; when BASIC obeys an instruction 
containing a variable, it substitutes the value that it has stored for that variable 
(given by a previous instruction) for the variable name. 


But why should you use a variable rather than put the constant value you want in 
the instruction? By using a variable, you make the instruction versatile — by 
changing the value of the variable, you can use the same instruction over and over, 
rather than have a different instruction for each value. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 3 





Chapter 1; Starting with BASIC 





There are different types of variable to store different types of information. The 
two main types are 'numeric' (for numbers) and string’ (for text strings). Numeric 
variables have names consisting of any of the letters 'A' to 'Z’, 'a’ to 'z', '0' to 9’ and 
'.'; string variables have similar names but must end with the character '$'. The first 
character of a variable name must be a letter, not a number. 


Note that although you can use small or capital letters in variable names, they are 
considered as identical by BASIC. For example, 'dog', ‘Dog’ and 'DOG' are all the 
same variable, even though they look different. In this user guide, variable names 
will be shown using small letters to help you distinguish them from keywords. 
Typical variable names are as follows: 

numeric: a, count, vat.rate 

string: a$, name$, address$ 


You are free to choose variable names with only a few limitations, the most 
significant of which is that the variable name must not be the same as a BASIC 
keyword (as listed in Appendix IV) and may not contain embedded spaces. 


The main way to give a value to a variable is to ‘assign’ the value to it, using the 
equals sign (=). For example, to give the variable ‘vat’ a value of 0.15, you could: 
Type vat=0.15 
yP — [RETURN J 
variable assigned value 
You could then use this variable when you wanted the value 0.15. For example: 
Type PRINT, ,vat, 


command variable 


Similarly by defining a string variable, such as 'name$': 
Type nameS="Anne Elizabeth Barnard" 
you can print this name easily and quickly, using: 
Type PRINT name$ 
command variable 
The value of a variable is changed, but not fixed by assigning to it: its value can be 


changed as many times as you want. When the variable is used in an instruction, La 
value most recently assigned to it will be used. 


It may surprise you to see the form that the assignment instruction takes. Where is 
the command telling BASIC what to do? The answer is that BASIC analyses the 
instruction, sees the equals sign and interprets it as if there were an invisible 


4 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 1: Starting with BASIC 





assignment command at the start of the instruction! (In early versions of BASIC, 
you had to use the assignment command 'LET’, but with modern BASICs, although 
you can use LET, it is no longer necessary.) 


1.5.3 Calculated information (expressions) 


The third type of information which can be used in an instruction is an ‘expression’. 
An expression is an instruction to BASIC to calculate the information intended. It 
consists of one or more constants and/or variables, combined with BASIC 
‘operators’ or ‘functions’. The operators and functions instruct BASIC how to 
manipulate the information provided with them to calculate the required 
information. 


Operators Operators are in general single symbols that are used between two 
items of information, providing a result which is derived from them both. 


The simplest expression to understand is one using the familiar operators for 
addition and subtraction. Try the following instructions using expressions with 
these operators: 


Type PRINT 42+1 
and 
Type PRINT 43-1 


Their meanings and effects should be obvious. 


Two other highly useful operators are for multiplication (*) and division (/). While 
the symbols used may be unfamiliar, their actions are not. Try the following: 


Type PRINT 42*2 

and 

Type PRINT 42/3 

These operators work with numeric constants and variables. The only one that 
works with strings is '+', which adds one string to the end of another. Type the 
following exactly as shown, but before pressing for the third time, try and 
predict what will happen. 

Type first$="Annie " 

Type last$="Oakley" 

Type PRINT first$+last$ 


Were you right? 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 5 





Chapter 1: Starting with BASIC 


Expressions need not be this simple. For example, to add 22, 44 and 90000032, 
then take 400311 from the result, you could use three separate instructions: 


Type PRINT 22+44 


66 
Ok 

Type PRINT 66+90000032 (RETA) 
90000098 
Ok 


Type PRINT 90000098-400311 [RETRY] 

Or, to save a lot of typing, you can use a single, more complex, expression to get an 
answer with a single instruction: 

Type PRINT 22+44+90000032-400311 [RETAN) 


Although there is a limit on the length and complexity of the expressions you can 
use, you are unlikely to exceed it. 


Once an expression contains more than one operator it is not always obvious how 
it will be evaluated. This is because the order in which the operators are applied can 
alter the result. For instance, 3+4*5 could be calculated as: 


3+4=7 
* 5 = 35 
or 
4° 5 ='20 
+3=23 


The BASIC operators and functions have priorities (called the ‘operator 
precedence’) which determine the order in which they are applied. For example, * 
and / are applied to the information to each side of them before + and —, so 3+4*5 
is evaluated as 3+(4*5) = 23. Operator precedence is described fully in Part II. For 
now, put round brackets around any part of an expression that you want BASIC to 
evaluate as a self-contained whole, using the result in the expression. For example 
(3+4)*5 is evaluated as (7)*5 while 3+(4*5) is evaluated as 3+(20). 


Functions Functions have names (rather like BASIC commands) and are followed 
by the information they manipulate, in brackets. A typical function is SQR, which 
provides a square root: 


Type PRINT SQR(121) 
ne 
Ok 


6 Mallard BASIC; Introduction 


Chapter 1: Starting with BASIC 


A typical function that works with strings is LEFT$, which extracts a specified 
number of characters from the start of a string. For example, to print the first three 
letters from name$ (set up on page 4): 


Type PRINT LEFT$ (name$, 3) 

Ann 

Ok 
(Note how the LEFT$ function uses two items of information, separated by a 
comma.) 


A third type of function uses information of one type but provides another. For 
example, to tell how long name$ is, instead of counting the number of characters 
yourself, let BASIC do it for you: 


Type PRINT LEN (name$) 
22 


Ok 
BASIC provides a wide variety of functions such as cosines, logarithms, extracting 
text from the middle of strings, converting strings to capitals and converting strings 
to numbers and vice versa. These are described in further detail in Chapter 5 and in 
Part II. You can even add your own functions to BASIC (using DEF FN, as 
described in Chapter 5). 


1.6 Chapter review 


In this chapter, you learned how to enter and leave BASIC, and about BASIC 
instructions, commands and information. You now know how to make BASIC 
perform simple tasks like calculating and displaying simple sums. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 7 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 2 





Starting programming 
with BASIC 


This chapter introduces you to fundamental concepts of programming and the 
simpler tools BASIC provides to help you write and use programs. 


2.1 A first program 


So far, although you have learned how to use a very limited number of BASIC 
facilities, you have not written or used a program. This can soon be corrected. Type 
the following exactly as shown: 


NEW 
10 PRINT 42 
You have now written your first program! 


The first line is the command NEW which instructs BASIC to forget any program 
it might have stored, ready for you to construct a new program from scratch. 


The second line is your program. It consists of an instruction (the very first one you 
met, above), preceded by a number, known as a ‘line number’, The line number 
does two main things: it tells BASIC to store the instruction rather than obey it 
directly, and gives the stored instruction a label, which can be used for a variety of 


purposes. 
19, PRINT 42 
line number instruction 


That is all a program is: one or more BASIC instructions typed on separate lines, 
each of which is preceded by a (different) number. 


So how is this simple program different from the similar instruction? Programs 
have two extra properties: 


e programs can be used over and over again with a minimum of effort 


© programs can be stored on a disc for use later, even after the computer has 
been turned off 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 9 





Chapter 2: Starting programming with BASIC 


To make BASIC obey the program you have typed, you use the command RUN: 


Type RUN 

42 

Ok 
(If you get some other message, there is an error in your program. Start again with 
NEW etc and be more careful with your typing!) 


To store your program on disc, use the command SAVE. Programs are stored by 
your computer's operating system as named files; you specify the name to use by 
giving a string after SAVE: 
Type SAVE “NUMPROG" 

Ok 


The file name should not include a'.' unless you want to specify a file type. 
To use the program from the disc, you can make BASIC read it from the disc using 
the command LOAD, then run it: 
Type ae “NUMP ROG" 
Type RUN 
Ok 
Alternatively, you can load and run it with one instruction, by using the command 
RUN with the program name: 
Type oe “NUMPROG" 
Ok 


Note: The program that you load doesn't have to have been typed in within 
BASIC. It can equally well have been prepared using a word processor or some 
other text editor and then stored as an ASCII file (ie. as a simple text file). 


Once the program has been read from the disc, you can use it over and over again 
by using RUN without a program name. You do not have to read it again each time. 


(if you are a real sceptic you can prove that this version of RUN really works, by 
turning the computer off then on again, restarting BASIC and only then using the 
RUN command. This level of scepticism could prove rather inconvenient, though!) 


If you use acommand such as DIR to examine the disc, you will notice that BASIC 
has stored the program as a file with the name specified with the SAVE command 
plus the filetype ',BAS'. This filetype identifies the file as a BASIC program. You 
do not need to include this filetype when creating or using a program with SAVE, 
LOAD, RUN (or CHAIN), but you can include a filetype if you want to specify one 
other than '.BAS', 


10 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 2: Starting programming with BASIC 


2.2 More complex programs 


If a program consists of only one line (like the example above), the line number is 
almost irrelevant. But as soon as you add more lines, the line numbers assume great 
importance: if the line number of a new line is the same as an existing line, the new 
line entirely replaces the old one; if the line number is different, the new line is 
added so that the program consists of lines in order of ascending line number. 


For example, type the following four lines exactly as shown: 


NEW ([Rewav] 

30 PRINT 64%*64 [Rew] 

10 PRINT "64 times 64" Geta 
20 PRINT "is:" [ReWA 


To see how the program is stored by the computer, use the command LIST: 
Type LIST 
This displays: 

10 PRINT "64 times 64" 

20 PRINT “is:" 


30 PRINT 64*64 
Ok 


As you can see, despite the order in which you typed the lines, BASIC has stored 
them in the order of their line numbers. This is not just for show: it indicates the 
order in which the lines will be obeyed when the program is run. To check, run the 
program and see the results: 


Type RUN 
64 times 64 
is 
4096 
Ok 


BASIC even provides a command to supply line numbers for you automatically 
when typing in a new program. This command is AUTO: 


AUTO generates line numbers starting at 10, increasing by 
10 each time you press 
AUTO 620 generates line numbers starting at the specified start 


(620), increasing by 10 each time you press 


AUTO 100,20 generates line numbers starting at the first number 
(100), increasing by the second number (20) each 


time you press 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 11 





Chapter 2: Starting programming with BASIC 


To tum off AUTO once it has started, type the special character combination called 
Control-C. Control-C (and other similar Control-/etter combinations) is typed by 
holding down the key and pressing the given letter key. 


In the examples given in this guide, program lines usually contain only a single 
instruction. Program lines can however have more than one instruction on them, as 
long as they are separated by colons. Thus, the preceding example program could 
be written all on one program line as: 


10,PRINT "64 times 64":,PRINT"is:": PRINT 64*64 
line number first instruction second instruction third instruction 


There are occasions when this ability is very useful, but for now you are advised to 
stick to a single instruction per line, because this makes it easier to change 
programs, see how they work and trace the cause of the problem when they don't! 


2.3 Changing a program 


If you are not happy with a program, one way to ‘change’ it is to wipe it out using 
NEW and start all over again. While this is perfectly sensible for very short 
programs, it is a very inefficient way of making small changes to large programs. 


BASIC provides a number of commands to make developing programs easier than 
this: 


© To display the program on the screen, use LIST as described above. 


If the program is too long to fit onto the screen in one go, you can use LIST and 
press Control-S to ‘freeze’ the display when the part that you want to see is on the 
screen, then press Control-S again to unfreeze the display and continue listing or 
Control-C to unfreeze the display but stop the listing. 


Alternatively, if you know the line numbers of a part of the program you want to 
display, you can specify them with LIST, as a single number or range, as follows: 


LIST 120 lists a single line of the program 

LIST -80 lists from the start of the program up to and 
including the specified line 

LIST 400- lists from the specified line to the end of the program 


LIST 420-440 lists the lines in the specified range 


Alternatively, you can list the program on the printer, using LLIST. This behaves 
exactly as LIST, except that the lines selected are printed on the printer, not on the 
screen. 


2 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 2: Starting programming with BASIC 


© To delete a single line, simply type its line number followed by Gevan. 
For example, to delete line 400: 
Type 400 


To delete a range of lines, use the command DELETE with a line or range of lines 
specified as for LIST above. 


e To replace an existing line with a new version, type the new line with the line 
number of the existing line. 


e To tidy up the line numbers in the program so that the gaps between them 
are all the same, use RENUM: 

Type RENUM 

This command changes the number of the first line in the program to 10, the next to 
20, the next to 30, etc. References to these line numbers within the program are also 
adjusted accordingly. (RENUM is more versatile than this. For example, RENUM 


100 will change the first line number to 100, the second to 110 and so on. Refer to 
the RENUM keyword in Part II for further details.) 


e The final facility to help you modify programs is the command EDIT. This 
allows you to modify a specified existing program line. 
For example, to edit line 100: 
Type: EDIT 100 
The EDIT command displays the current contents of the specified line and provides 
the following facilities for changing that line: 

— movement of the cursor to any position on the program line 

— movement of the cursor to a specific character 

— deletion of characters before and after the cursor 

— deletion of all characters from the cursor up to a specific character 


either insertion of new characters or direct replacement of existing characters 
(overstrike mode) 


These actions can be carried out either by using BASIC's Command editor (by 
issuing some special editing commands, given in Appendix VI) or, more easily, by 
using its Screen-based editor. This changes the line ‘before your eyes’ in response 
to your pressing particular keys on the keyboard. All the instructions in this part of 
the BASIC manual assume that you are using the Screen-based editor. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 13 





Chapter 2: Starting programming with BASIC 


The keystrokes to use on the PCW are as follows: 
— (©) and [&) to move the cursor along the line 
- and [7] to move the cursor between different screen lines where the 
program line is displayed on more than one screen line 
- character to move the cursor forward to the specified character 
- to delete the character before the cursor 
- to delete the character under the cursor 
- character to delete everything between the cursor and the specified 
character 
= to delete from the cursor to the end of the line 
— (to swap from insert mode to overstrike mode or back again 
- to abandon all the changes that have been made to the program line 
- to finish editing the line 
To demonstrate how you would use the Screen-based editor, suppose you had 
typed 20 PRNT instead of 20 PRINT. To edit this line, type: 
EDIT 20 
20 GRNT 
Move the cursor to the N by pressing [=] twice 


20 PH 


Then type I, giving you: 


20 PRINT 


Finally press to store the new version. 


Note: You can also use the facilities of EDIT on the line you have just typed 
(whether a command or a program line) by typing A. 


2.4 Chapter review 


In this chapter you have learned how to create programs from the commands and 
using the types of information introduced in the previous chapter. You have also 
seen how to store programs on a disc and re-use them, and how to examine and 
change a program. 





14 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3 





Real programming 


3.1 Designing programs 


As described in the previous chapter, a computer program is simply a collection of 
numbered instructions you give to the computer, to tell it how to perform a task. 
Programming is the collection of activities needed to produce a computer program. 


Developing even the simplest program will involve you in a number of different 
tasks. A typical breakdown of activities in the programming of a fairly serious 
application might be as follows: 


— deciding what you want the program to achieve (analysis) 

— deciding how the program should achieve what you want (design) 
— preparing the program (coding) 

— checking that the program works correctly (testing) 

— writing instructions for the user (documentation) 

— correcting, changing and improving the program (maintenance) 


These tasks will be re-examined in great detail in later chapters. For now, the most 
important thing to realise is that you should design a program before beginning to 
write it. 

To design a program, you must first analyse the task you want the computer to 
perform into its constituent sub-tasks. When you understand what each sub-task 
must do, you translate each into a specification of the steps that the computer must 
take to perform the whole task, expressed using the words and concepts that the 
programming language provides. 


All programs take information, manipulate it in some way, then use the 
manipulated information to produce results. One of the simplest ways of breaking 
down a task, then, is to consider it as these three stages: 


— obtaining the information 
— manipulating the information 
— producing the results 


Typically, information is typed by the user or read from the program or a disc; is 
manipulated to produce totals, averages, sorted lists, etc; and is then printed on the 
screen or on paper as numbers, text, bar charts etc or stored on a disc for later use 
by this or other programs. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 15 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


3.2 Getting information 


When a program is run, the information that it uses can come from three main 
sources: from within the program, from the user typing it, or from files stored on 
discs. Each of these will now be described in turn. 


3.2.1 Information storage in the program 


If the information that a program needs is fixed, the simplest way to provide it is 
within the program itself. The simplest way is by using constants, either in 
instructions: 


330 PRINT "***SUB-TOTALS***" 


or by assigning the constant to a variable and using that instead: 


330 title$ = "***SUB-TOTALS***" 
340 PRINT titles 


You have already used this method in the example programs and will rarely write 
a program that does not use it to some extent. Using a variable to hold a constant 
value in this way has several advantages over using the constant itself: 


— if the constant is a long string or number, you need only type it (and get it 
right!) once, then use the shorter and easier-to-remember variable name 
throughout the program 


— if you assign the constants to variables all in one place, the program is 
easier to change. For example, if you use the variable client $ to hold the 
client name, which is printed in various places in the program, you can 
easily adapt the program for a different client by assigning a new client 
name to client$, rather than having to search through the program for 
each mention of the name so you can change it 


— variable names can be chosen to make the program easier to understand. For 
instance, PRINT value*vat.rate is rather more obvious than PRINT 
value*0.15 


If you use lists of constants in a program, instead of assigning each in turn, you can 
use a pair of keywords called DATA and READ. DATA is followed by a list of 
string or numeric values, separated by commas. READ is followed by a variable 
(or list of variables separated by commas) to which it assigns constants in turn from 
the DATA list. 


16 Mallard BASIC; Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


For example, if you wanted to store the number of days in each calendar month, 
you could use the following DATA statement: 


100 DATA 31,28;31, 30, 31,30, 31,31, 30,31, 30, 32 


Then use the following READ instructions to assign the information: 


110 READ jan.days 
120 READ feb.days 
130 READ mar.days 
etc 


To save typing, you could include several variables in the READ instruction: 
110 READ jan.days,feb.days,mar.days 


READ and DATA are particularly useful for assigning constants to a special type 
of variable called arrays; see Section 3.3.7, below. 


You may have any number of DATA statements in a program. BASIC treats them 
as if they were a single list of constants, starting with the DATA statement with the 
lowest line number. Each time READ is used to read a value, the next one is read 
from the list. If you try to READ more values than are in the list, an error is 
generated. 


A further keyword, RESTORE, can be used to alter the order in which values are 
read. For information on this and other ways to use DATA and READ, see Part II. 


3.2.2 Getting information from the user 


The programs that you have so far learned to write have had a major limitation: 
they each have a single, fixed purpose. If you want one of these programs to do 
something even slightly different, you have to change the program! 


For example, say you run a (very!) simple retail operation, selling a single product 
and want a program to tell you how much to charge for it to make a 20% profit, the 
following program would do: 

10 cost=10 

20 profit=0.2 

30 PRINT "The price to charge is ";cost+cost*profit 


Type this program in and run it. (Don't forget to type NEW first. Use AUTO 
if you want.) 


The program works well, but is rather limited: if the item price changes, you must 
retype line number 10; if the required profit changes, you must retype line number 
20. This is rather tedious and somewhat error-prone. (Try it and see.) It also means 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 17 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


that only someone who knows how to modify the program can use it to calculate 
the price when the cost or profit margin changes. 


The real problem is with lines 10 and 20, because they contain information that is 
constant, while you want the program to cater for information that varies. 
BASIC provides a solution, in the form of a command called INPUT, which asks 
for information when the program is run then assigns it to specified variables. 


To see it in action, change line 10 to the following: 
10 INPUT cost 


When you run the program now, it displays a '?' and waits. The program is waiting 
for you to type a number, followed by Gewau. It will then assign the number to the 
variable ‘cost’. Type a number and press (Reway). Run the program again, typing a 
different number. 


The changed program is now: 


10 INPUT cost 


changed 


20 profit=0.2 
30 PRINT "The price to charge is ";cost+cost*profit 


INPUT can also be used to assign text to a string variable, by simply using a string 
variable in the instruction (such as INPUT name$). There are certain limitations 
on the text that this can handle (it does not, for example, cope with commas as you 
would expect), but these can be overcome (see LINE INPUT in Part II). 


INPUT has successfully made your program a bit more versatile, but in its new 
form, the program is still a little daunting to use. When you run it, it is not obvious 
just what you should do when the '?' prompt is displayed; the program should give 
a little help. You have already met a command that can be used here: PRINT with 
a text string. 


Modify the program to display a message (prompt) telling the user what to do when 
they see the '?'. Try the modified program and see if this helps. 

Here is one solution: 

5 PRINT "Type the item cost price, then press. RETURN" 


prompt (text string) 
10 INPUT cost 
20 profit=0.2 
30 PRINT "The price to charge is ";cost+cost*profit 





18 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


Did you remember to put the prompt before line 10? The particular text chosen for 
a prompt is totally irrelevant to how the program works, but is VERY important to 
the people who use the program. Carefully worded prompts make a program much 
easier to use. 


Because INPUT often needs a prompt to explain to users what they should type, 
BASIC allows you to include a prompt in the INPUT instruction. Using this, lines 
5 and 10 can be combined, as follows: 


10 INPUT “Type the itemcost price; then press RETURN", cost 


prompt variable 


20 profit=0.2 
30 PRINT "The price to charge is ";cost+cost*profit 


Note that a prompt used in an INPUT instruction must be a constant text string, not 
a string variable. (Can you think why? If it were a variable, INPUT would try to 
assign a value to it, not display it as a prompt!) Also the prompt must come before 
the variable, not after it. 


Note the comma after the text string. This suppresses the '?' prompt that BASIC 
would normally display after the text string. If you want the '?' displayed, use a 
semicolon instead of the comma. 


Save the program on your disc, with the name "MARKUP". We will return to it 
later on. 


Modify the program to prompt for a profit value too, run it and check that it works 
correctly. 


BASIC provides another method of getting information typed by the user, in the 
form of the INKEY$ function. INKEY$ quickly examines the keyboard to see if a 
key has been pressed and either returns it as a single character string, or returns a 
null string if no key is pressed. An instruction using INKEY$ takes the form: 


variable$ = INKEYS 


Since INKEY$ does not wait for the user to press (or any other key), it is 
used quite differently to INPUT. It has two main uses: to check on what the user 
has typed while carrying on with some other task, and to provide a quick and easy 
single-character input. 


Unfortunately, both uses require BASIC commands that have not been introduced 
yet. To see INKEY$ in action, you will have to wait for the next chapter! 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 19 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


3.2.3 Getting information from disc 


The third main source of information is from data files stored on discs. Data files 
are created using BASIC, to hold numeric and string information, rather like 
variables. However, unlike variables, the information in files is preserved until you 
deliberately change it: it is not lost when you do things like change programs or 
switch the computer off. 


Using data files is described in detail in Chapters 6 and 7. 


3.3 How information is stored 


This section describes the types of variables and information that BASIC can use. 


3.3.1 Choosing variable names 


BASIC leaves the choice of variable name largely up to the programmer. The main 
options (and restrictions) are as follows: 


— use any of the letters 'A' to 'Z' or ‘a’ to 'z' (capital and small letters are 
considered equivalent) 


— use ',' at any position other than the first character 
— use any of the numbers '0' to '9' at any position other than the first character 


— use % ! # or $ only as the last character, and then only when you intend their 
special meaning (see variable types, below) 


— do not use variable names which are identical to a BASIC keyword listed in 
Appendix IV 


Finally, remember that the case (capitals/small letters) of variables is ignored. (The 
variable name$ is the same as Name$, NAMeS, etc. etc.) 


Within these limitations, you should choose variable names so that they indicate 
what the variable is being used for. For instance, if a variable is used to maintain a 
trial balance, use the variable name 'balance’ or even 'trial.balance', not 
something completely obscure like 'zz'. This will make it far easier for you to 
understand your programs when you come back to correct or improve them later 
on. 


You should however keep variable names reasonably short, to keep your programs 
compact and reduce the number of typing errors you will make. Try typing 
trial.balance.carried. forward 

= trial.balance.carried.forward + 1 


a few times and I think you'll agree! 


20 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


3.3.2 The short life of a variable 


Variables are by their very nature rather flighty, transient things. The current value 
of a variable is lost whenever you: 


— RUN a program 
— LOAD a program 
— leave BASIC 


If you try to use a variable for which the value has been lost, it will give 0 (for a 
numeric variable) or the null string "" (for a string variable). 


There are several ways to preserve the information contained in variables so that 
you can use them later, but for now just remember when writing a program to 
assign the required values to variables before you use them; don't assume they will 
be preserved from the last time you used a program: they won't. 


3.3.3 Numbers 


When typing numbers for BASIC to use, you can use a variety of forms, as follows. 


The most familiar numbers are what are known as 'unscaled numbers’: integers and 
decimal numbers, such as 44444, 0, 3.111, 3333333333.77702. This is the form of 
numbers we see and use every day and will probably be most useful for your 
programming. Note however that you must not include commas or spaces in these 
numbers. 


Probably less familiar (unless you have a scientific background) are ‘scaled 
numbers’ (otherwise known as scientific format numbers), in which the number is 
expressed as a decimal number multiplied by the number 10 raised to a positive or 
negative number. They take the form n.nnnE/sign/nn, or n.nnnD/signjnn. Scaled 
numbers are mainly useful for expressing very large and very small numbers. (The 
E and D portions of the number dictate the accuracy with which BASIC stores the 
number.) 


Finally, BASIC provides 'based numbers’ to let you express numbers in octal (to 
base 8) or hexadecimal (to base 16). Octal numbers are preceded by &O; 
hexadecimal numbers by &H. Based numbers will mainly be of interest if you are 
used to low level programming with minicomputers or microcomputers. 


Typical numbers in each of these representations are as follows: 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 21 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


Unscaled Scaled Octal Hexadecimal 
0 OEO &O0 &HO 

100 1E2 &0144 &H64 

—100 -1E2 &0177634 &HFF9C 
100.1 1.001E2 - = 

0.023 2.3E-2 _ = 

The allowed range of each format is as follows: 

—1.7E38 —1.7E38 &00 &HO 

to +1.7E38 to +1.7E38 to &0177777 to & HFFFF 


3.3.4 Numeric variables 


Regardless of how the number was represented, BASIC only has three types of 
numeric variable to store it in: integer, single precision and double precision. These 
differ in the amount of memory storage required, how fast BASIC can manipulate 
them and the accuracy with which they can store different types of number. Once a 
number has been stored in one of these variables, the original representation is 
forgotten. 


Integer variables can only hold whole numbers (ie. without fractional or decimal 
parts), in the range —32768 to +32767. Any decimal portion is rounded when the 
number is assigned to an integer variable, while numbers outside the specified 
range cause an error. 


Single precision and double precision variables can store numbers including a 
decimal part in the approximate range 


—100000000000000000000000000000000000000 
to +100000000000000000000000000000000000000 


(-1E38 to +1E38 in scientific notation). Assigning numbers outside this range will 
cause an error. Single precision variables are accurate to approximately seven 
significant digits; double precision to approximately sixteen digits. The smallest 
number that a double precision variable can store that is distinct from 0 is 
approximately 3E-39. 


The type of a numeric variable is indicated by the last character of the variable 
name, as follows: 


% means integer 

! means single precision 

# means double precision 
Anything else usually means single precision (but see DEFINT, DEFSNG, 
DEFDBL, DEFSTR). 





22 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


3.3.5 Text strings 


Text strings are sequences of zero or more characters, surrounded by double quotes 
("). Typical text strings are: 


wy 


"and did those feet" 
"Phillip.P.Jones" 
wogn 


Note that the last is only a string because it is enclosed in quotes; without the quotes 
it would of course be a number. 


What is actually held in the string is not the characters themselves but the 8-bit 
codes used to represent these characters. These codes are combinations of Os and 1s 
in the range 00000000 to 11111111, but are most easily thought of either as 
hexadecimal numbers in the range &HO00...2HFF or as decimal numbers in the 
range 0...255. The number corresponding to a character is known as the character's 
internal value. 


A consequence of this is that when you print a text string either on the screen or on 
a printer, BASIC sends the codes for the characters to the output device and it is up 
to the software controlling the device to translate these codes back into characters. 
However, the code used for each character depends on the software you are using 
and your printer, in particular, may not use the same set of codes as your computer 
— especially as ASCII, the acknowledged standard set of codes, only defines the 
characters associated with codes in the range &HO00...2H7F. So when you go 
outside the range of characters in the ASCII set (A...Z, a..z, 0...9 and the standard 
punctuation marks) you can find yourself entering one character and printing 
another! 


Strings can contain any ‘character’ code between 0 and 255 but not all codes can be 
entered by typing "character": in particular you cannot use this method to enter 
some of the codes because these are used to represent actions, such as starting a 
new line or a new page, rather than printable characters. However, there is a 
BASIC function, CHR$, which can be used to enter any code. You just need to 
know the internal value of the code. We will see how CHR$ is used later in this 
chapter when we use these ‘Control’ codes to control the screen and the printer. 


3.3.6 String variables 


String variables are distinguished from other types by a suffix of $. The maximum 
number of characters that can be stored in a string variable is 255; the minimum is 
zero (the null string, ""), Characters with internal values anywhere between 0 and 
255 can be stored in string variables. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 23 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


3.3.7 Organising variables (arrays) 


The variables described up until now have all had quite independent, separate, 
existences. While this is entirely satisfactory for programs that simply take 
information, manipulate it and print the results, there are times when you will want 
to hold lists or tables of information in variables, preserving the relationship 
between them. 


One way of doing this is to use related variable names. For example, to store the 
names of record albums, you could use the string variables 'album1$", 'album2$’, 
‘album3$' etc. 


While this method of naming makes the relationship obvious to you, BASIC 
entirely misses the point — it sees no ordering or grouping in these names. For 
instance, to print the name of album 2, you need the instruction: 


PRINT album2$ 
To print the name of album 3, you need a different instruction: 
PRINT album3$ 


And so on, for each name. Even more seriously, there is no way (with the 
commands described so far) to construct a program to perform simple, useful tasks 
like printing the album name from its number. 


Luckily, BASIC provides a way to solve these problems by organising variables 
into an arrangement called an ‘array’. A variable in an array is called (naturally 
enough) an ‘array variable’ or ‘array element’. 


An array consists of a group of variables with the same name and type. In the 
simplest form of array, the variables are organised into a list, being distinguished 
by a numeric value in brackets added to the end of the variable name. This value is 
know as the ‘array index’ and is 0 for the first element, 1 for the next one and so on 
(although you can make BASIC give the first element an index of 1; see OPTION 
BASE). 


Arrays can be made using any of the types of variable described above. For 
example, while album$ is a string variable, album$(6) is a (string) array variable 
and album(3) is a (numeric) array variable. Note that all these variables are distinct. 


Array variables can be used exactly as the equivalent (non-array) variable type, but 
their main use is as indicated above: in processing lists or tables of information. For 
example, to solve the problem posed above, the following program will suffice: 





24 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


10 album$(0)="Dark side of the moon" 

20 album$(1)="Vivaldi'ts four seasons" 

30 album$(2)="A bridge over troubled water" 

40 INPUT "What number album do you want a title 
for";number 

50 PRINT albumS (number) 


Lines 10 to 30 give values to the first three elements in the array album$(). Line 40 
gets the album number wanted by the user. Line 50 prints the string stored in the 
corresponding array variable. 


If you are going to use an array with more than ten elements, or want to use fewer 
elements and not waste memory, you should ‘dimension’ the array before using it, 
with the command DIM. DIM is followed by the array name and the maximum 
subscript to be used in brackets, for example: 


10 DIM album$ (3) 


Arrays can have many dimensions, not just the single one of album$() above. For 
instance, if you wanted to record the temperature at a number of points within a 
room, you might use 'temp(x,y,z)' where x, y and z are the co-ordinates of the point 
within the room, chosen so that no two points will have the same x, y and z co- 
ordinates. If you wanted to record how this information changed with time, you 
could use 'temp(x,y,z,t)', where t is the time scale, and so on. Before you can use an 
array with more than one dimension, you must dimension the array using DIM (for 
example, DIM temp(10,10,15)). 


Note that an array cannot be used as a variable, only the elements in it. An array is 
just a way of organising variables for your convenience. 


The quickest and easiest way of setting up an array from constants is to use the 
keywords DATA and READ, introduced above. Contrast the following program 
fragments, both of which store the days in the month in an array called ‘days'. The 
first uses DATA, READ and a FOR...NEXT loop to produce code which is 
compact and easy to understand; the second does not. The FOR...NEXT loop will 
be explained in full in Section 4.2. 


10 DIM days (12) 

20 DATA, 31,28,31,30,31,30, 31,31, 30,31,30,31 
30 FOR month = 1 TO 12 

40 READ days (month) 

50 NEXT 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 25 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


10 DIM days (12) 


20 days(1) = 31 
30 days(2) = 28 
40 days (3) = 31 
50 days(4) = 30 
60 days(5) = 31 
70 days(6) = 30 
80 days(7) = 31 
90 days(8) = 31 
100days(9) = 30 
110 days(10) = 31 
120days(11) = 30 
130 days(12) = 31 


3.3.8 Choosing variable types 


The choice of variable type can be broken into two levels: numeric or string, and 
integer or single or double precision. 


String variables must be used if you want to store text (numeric variables cannot be 
used for this), but can also be used to store numbers if they are not going to be 
manipulated as numbers. 


Integer variables should be used whenever you don't need to store fractional 
information and the number is in the permitted range (-32768 to +32767), because 
integer variables produce smaller, faster programs. 


Single precision variables will probably be sufficient for most other uses. As a 
rough guide, you should only need to use double precision variables if you want to 
preserve more than six significant digits in your calculations. Double precision 
variables take up more memory and considerably increase the time taken to 


perform calculations. 


An awkward point to bear in mind is that while we think and calculate in decimal, 
most computers do so in binary, converting decimal numbers to binary for storage 
and calculation, converting the binary back to decimal for display. Fractional 
numbers which can be expressed exactly in decimal, can't necessarily be expressed 
exactly in binary and as a result the answers to calculations may be less accurate 
than you expect. For example, the result of a simple calculation might be 
0.9999998 rather than 1. 


This ‘inaccuracy’ is a direct result of expressing floating point numbers in binary 
and it affects all programs that carry out floating point arithmetic. Another effect is 


26 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


that numbers that appear the same when you print them aren't necessarily identical, 
because the displayed numbers will probably have been 'rounded' to some number 
of decimal places. In practice, you should always round any calculated result 
before using it, with the BASIC function ROUND (see Section 5.3.2). 


Array variables are generally useful when the information being stored is 
obviously ordered, into lists or tables, and you want to preserve that ordering. A 
typical example of a table of data is an address list, which could be stored using 
separate arrays for the name, address and telephone number, linking them for each 
individual by a shared index number (eg. name$ (22) plus address$ (22) plus 
phone’ (22) as the entry for one individual). 


3.4 Outputting the results 


The purpose of any program is to produce tangible, usable results. This is described 
as the program's Output. 


There are two main types of output: visible (human-readable) output on the screen 
or on a printer and ‘invisible’ (machine-readable) output which is usually stored on 
disc prior to being processed by another program. What we shall look at here is 
visible output. Output to disc is described in Chapter 6. 


3.4.1 Output to the screen 


The command used to send output to the screen is PRINT. This command has 
already been used extensively in previous examples but in a rather limited form. 
All we have done is print single items, either on separate lines or one after the other 
along the same line. 


The display these simple commands produced has often been rather untidy, with 
information split between lines and with similar information on different lines not 
lining up vertically. In fact, PRINT instructions can give you much greater control 
over where each piece of information is displayed. 


The simplest PRINT instruction consists of just the keyword PRINT. This moves 
the cursor to the start of the next line and is most frequently used to produce a blank 
line. More complex PRINT instructions follow the keyword PRINT by 
combinations of items to print and instructions that control their printing. 


The items to print must be separated by commas or semicolons. If the two items are 
separated by a semicolon, the second item is printed immediately after the first, 
without leaving a space. However, if the items are separated by a comma, the 
second item is positioned at the start of the next print zone. 





Mallard BASIC; Introduction 27 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


Print zones have an effect rather like tab stops on a typewriter: they enable you to 
put your output into columns. Each print zone gives you a separate column. 


To see the effect of the print zones, type and run the following program: 

10 PRINT "Print zone number" 

20 PRINT SUK, EZ Be, IG 

Initially the zones are 15 characters wide (effectively, giving you a tab stop every 
15 characters across the screen), but you can change the width of the zones to n 
characters by using a ZONE n command. For example, you could make each 
column 10 characters wide by having a program line containing the instruction 
ZONE 10. 


The items to be printed may be numeric or string constants, variables or 
expressions, or the ‘print functions' SPC(n) and TAB(n). Printing SPC(n) prints n 
spaces; printing TAB(n) moves the cursor to column nv on the current line, or to 
column n on the next line if the cursor is to the right of column n. So, for example, 
you could print three numbers separated by six spaces with an instruction like: 


PRINT number.1;SPC(6) ;number.2;SPC(6) ;number.3 

After all the items in the print instruction have been printed, the cursor normally 
moves to the start of the next line. However, if the instruction ends in a comma, 
semicolon, SPC(”) or TAB(n), the cursor will stay where it is. To see this effect, 
run the following program and note how the semicolon ‘joins up' the output from 
lines 30 and 40. 


10 PRINT "Different" 
20 PRINT “lines" 
30 PRINT "The same "; 
40 PRINT "line" 


Controlling the format of the individual items 


The PRINT commands we have used so far have displayed your list of print items 
‘free format' — that is, according to a simple set of standard rules. 


If you are not happy with the way PRINT displays print items, you can give your 
own specification of how they should be shown. To do this, you include the 
keyword USING in your PRINT statement, followed by a ‘format template’. 
Format templates give you a wide range of options in presenting text and 
particularly numbers. Full details of format templates are given in Part II (Chapter 
6), but the following example should give you an idea of the flexibility provided. 


Suppose you are handling amounts of money in a program. Naturally, you will 
want to tabulate these neatly. At first glance, you might think that all you need to do 
to produce a neat table is to use a TAB function, as in line 50 below: 





28 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


10 sum(1)=1.24 

20 sum(2)=0.333 

30 sum(3)=1444 

40 FOR count = 1 TO 3 

50 PRINT TAB(40); sum(count) 
60 NEXT 


Type this program and then run it. As you will see, the figures line up but by their 
first character — not by the decimal point as you would like. 


You can make the decimal points line up if you change line 50 to: 
50 PRINT TAB(40); USING "###, ###.##"; sum(count) 


The “###, ###.##" is the format template that is to be used for sum (count). 
The pattern of #s specifies that each number should be displayed as six figures to 
the left of the decimal point (if necessary, padded out with spaces) followed by two 
to the right of the decimal place (with the second decimal place rounded). The 
comma specifies that the figures to the left of the decimal should be grouped in 
threes as shown in the template, with the groups separated by commas. 


Run the revised program to see its effect. 


3.4.2 Output to the printer 


Outputting information to the printer uses the LPRINT command, rather than the 
PRINT command, but is otherwise just like outputting information to the screen. 
The instructions used are very similar and all the print functions described above 
(TAB, SPC) and the format templates have the same effect. 


3.5 Controlling the output device 


Print functions and format templates don't represent the only control you have over 
how your output is presented. You can also control the device itself. In the case of 
screen output, this means you can choose whereabouts on the screen each print 
item is placed — and you can clear away information you no longer require. On a 
printer, as well as moving the print position, you can select different print modes 
and control such things as the number of characters per inch across the page (the 
Character pitch) and the distance between one line and the next (the Line Pitch). 


The way you control these devices is by sending some special sequences of 8-bit 
codes to the device. These control sequences are either single characters with 
internal values in the range 0...31 (Control codes), or short groups of two or three 
characters, the first of which is the ‘Escape’ character (internal value 27; also 
known as ESC). The groups of characters are recognised by the device as control 
sequences and are acted upon accordingly. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 29 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


A number of programs contain the facilities to send control sequences to the screen 
and the printer. What we describe here is how you send these control sequences 
from BASIC. 


3.5.1 Controlling the screen 


The actual facilities and the codes required depend on the computer you are using 
and the operating system you are running. However, most systems are designed to 
provide the same facilities and use the same control sequences as one of the 
standard computer terminals — in particular, the VT52 and ADM3A terminals. 


Details of the codes you should use will be given in your computer's own user 
guide, under a title like ‘Screen handling’, ‘Monitor control’ or ‘Terminal 
characteristics’. This may also tell you which standard terminal is being emulated. 


CP/M Plus, the operating system on the PCW, provides broadly the same facilities 
as and uses the same control sequences as a VTS2 terminal. The codes are listed in 
Appendix III "Terminal characteristics’ in the.section of the PCW User Instructions 
that describes using CP/M. 


The best way of showing how to make use of these codes is through an example. 
Suppose, for instance, that you wanted to: 

— Clear the screen entirely 

— Write the title ‘Screen control’ on the top line of the screen 

— Then move the cursor to line 15 and column 22, ready for the next piece of 

information: 

Looking at the appendix on "Terminal Characteristics’, you will see that you will 
need: 


— ESC E to clear the screen (or, more precisely, the section of the screen that 
your program can use but this is normally either the whole screen or all but 
the bottom line) 

— ESC H to move the cursor to its Home position in the top lefthand corner of 
the screen (ESC E leaves the cursor in its old position) 


— ESC Y r+32 c+32 moves the cursor to a given position, where r is the row 
number and c is the column number (both counted from the top lefthand 
corner of the screen) 


(The rows referred to here are the lines of the screen and the columns are the 
character positions across the screen, all characters on the screen being displayed 
on a rectangular grid, so many lines deep and so many characters wide.) 


30 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


To get the result you require, you should first send the escape sequence ESC E to 
clear the screen; follow this with the escape sequence ESC H to position the cursor 
at the top of the screen; then print the title 'Screen control’; and finally send the 
escape sequence ESC Y 47 54 to position the cursor at line 15, column 22 (47 is 
15+32; 54 is 22+32). 


The technique BASIC uses to send control sequences to the screen takes advantage 
of the fact that both control sequences and text strings are made up of 8-bit codes. 
So just as you use PRINT statements to send text strings to the screen, so you use 
PRINT statements to send the control sequences to the screen. The only 
complication is how you enter a control sequence that is given here as ESC Y 47 
54, for example, in your PRINT statement. 


The first stage is to understand what ESC Y 47 54 represents. Each part of this 
control sequence is a separate code. These codes can be written in one of three 
ways — as the code's 'name'’, as the character associated with the code (where this is 
a printable character, like Y), or as the corresponding internal value. In the case of 
ESC Y 47 54, ESC is the code's name, Y is the character associated with the code 
and 47 and 54 are internal values. (You can always assume that straightforward 
numbers are internal values; if the code corresponding to one of the characters 0...9 
is required, then it will usually be written as "0"..."9" to make this clear.) 


The techniques used to express these codes are simply those used to enter 
characters into a text string. 
— Ifthe code is associated with a printable character, you can express it as 
"character"; so to specify Y, you can put "Y" 
— But in general, you can specify it by using the CHR$ function and quoting 
its internal value; so for example, to specify 47, you put CHRS (47) 
Codes with special names don't represent printable characters and you express 
them using CHRS$ (value) where value is the code's internal value. For example, 
ESC has the internal value 27 and so to specify ESC, you put CHR$ (27) . 


You can put the codes of the escape sequence into the PRINT statement as 
individual print items, separated by semicolons. (Alternatively, you can combine 
them into a string of characters by using the + operator, described in Section 5.2.2 
‘Joining strings'.) So the complete sequence ESC Y 47 54 could be sent as: 
PRINT CHRS (27) ;"Y";CHRS (47) ;CHRS$ (54); 

(The final semicolon is included to prevent the cursor from moving to the start of 
the next line on the screen after completing this instruction — as described above.) 


As we emphasised earlier, using variable names rather than straightforward values 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 31 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


makes a program easier to understand and so we would recommend defining any 
escape sequences and control codes you plan to use at the beginning of your 
program. For the series of actions we suggested above, you might start your 
program with: 

10 escape$=CHR$S (27) 

20 clear$=escapeS+"E" 

30 homeS=escapeS+"H" 

40 moveS=escapeSt"y" 

(Lines 20...40 use the technique described in Section 5.2.2 to combine ESC with 
the next character in the escape sequence.) 


With these defined, you could then use the following set of PRINT statements to 
clear the screen, write the title 'Screen control’ and move to line 15, column 22: 
110 PRINT clear$;home$; 

120 PRINT "Screen control" 

130 lineno = 15 

140 column = 22 

150 PRINT move$;CHRS (lineno+32) ;CHR$ (column+32) ; 

160 PRINT “New text position"; 


Finding out the control codes and expressing them in PRINT statements is 


essentially all there is to screen control. However, there are a couple of further 
complications to do with other features of the way BASIC works. 


The first concerns the code with the internal value 9. This is normally treated by 
BASIC as a TAB character and automatically replaced by the spaces required to 
take the cursor to the next tab position. Whenever you need to use this special 
character as a control code or as part of an escape sequence, you should first use the 
command OPTION NOT TAB to suppress tab expansion. (If you want to use tab 
expansion again later in the program, you can re-enable it with the command 
OPTION TAB.) 


The second concerns the way BASIC automatically starts a new line when you 
reach the righthand side of the screen. It does this by inserting a couple of control 
codes (CR and LF) at an appropriate point in the list of print items. It is quite 
possible that these extra codes could be inserted in such a way that your escape 
sequences no longer have their desired effect. 


The solution to this problem is to precede your group of control codes and escape 
sequences by a program line containing the instruction WIDTH 255, which turns 
off the automatic next-line feature. If, at the end of the sequence of codes, you want 
restore this feature, you can do this with the instruction WIDTH n, where n is the 
number of character positions across the screen. On the PCW, the screen is 90 
characters wide and so the instruction you will need is WIDTH 90. 





32 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


Thus the complete series of instructions might be: 


10 escape$=CHR$ (27) 

20 clear$=escapeS+"E" 

30 homeS=escape$+"H" 

40 move$=escapeSt"y" 

100 OPTION NOT TAB : WIDTH 255 

110 PRINT clear$;home$; 

120 PRINT “Screen control" 

130 lineno = 15 

140 column = 22 

150 PRINT move$;CHRS$ (lineno+32) ;CHRS (column+32) ; 

160 PRINT "New text position"; 

170 OPTION TAB : WIDTH 90 

Note: The series of codes move$ ; CHR$ (lineno+32) ; CHR$ (column+32) 
can be very neatly packaged into a user-defined function. With such a function set 
up, you could move anywhere on the screen simply by quoting the line number and 
the column number. Details of user-defined functions are given in Chapter 4. 


3.5.2 Controlling the printer 


The codes used to control a printer, like those used to control the screen, are either 
single Control codes with internal values in the range 0...31 or Escape sequences 
Starting with the special "ESC' character (internal value 27). 


You use these codes for two main types of task: 


— To lay out and style text — by preceding the text by the codes needed to give 
it the required layout and style 


— To carry out specific actions such as starting a new page — by embedding the 
codes in the text where you want the action to happen. 


The codes you use depend on the printer you want to control — not on the computer 
you are using. So the place to look for details of these codes is in the printer's own 
manual. The codes that control the built-in printer are given in Part III, Appendix II 
of the PCW User Instructions. 


A number of printers use the same control sequences: such printers are described as 
being compatible. For example, there are a number of daisy-wheel printers that use 
the same codes as a Diablo 630, while some dot-matrix printers use the same codes 
as the Epson FX-80. However, these ‘standard’ codes only control a fairly limited 
range of printer features, so the printer manufacturer will normally have included 
additional ‘non-standard’ codes so that you can use all the printer's facilities. The 
PCW's built-in daisy-wheel printer in fact has two modes of operation — one in 
which it uses the same codes as a Diablo 630 and the other in which it uses the same 
codes as an Epson FX-80. In both these modes, extra control sequences have been 
included so that you can make full use of the printer's facilities. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 33 





Chapter 3: Real programming 





The control sequences are sent to the printer by inserting them in LPRINT 
statements. The codes in each control sequence are expressed either as 
"character" (when they are associated with printable characters like Y) or as 
CHR$(value) where value is the code's internal value — just as they are when you 
are using codes to control the screen. Indeed, the whole process of converting the 
printer's codes into LPRINT statements can be directly modelled on the statements 
used above to control the screen. Again, you need to remember to use OPTION 
NOT TAB to stop any characters with internal value 9 from being interpreted as a 
tab and expanded into a number of spaces, and you should use WIDTH LPRINT 
255 to stop BASIC's automatic new-line feature affecting printer escape sequences. 
(Again, restore the new-line feature by using another WIDTH LPRINT command 
which resets the width of the printer.) 


Often, the most difficult part of controlling the printer is in fact in working out the 
details of the codes you require. So as our example of LPRINT statements 
containing printer control sequences, we will use first the Diablo 630 codes and 
then the FX-80 codes that you would use to set Character pitch 12 (ie. 12 characters 
per inch along a line) and Line pitch 8 (ie. lines 1/8 inch apart down the page) 
because these are a couple of the more difficult codes to work out. 


Example of using Diablo-630 codes 


To set the Character Pitch on a Diablo 630 printer you have to set the distance the 
printhead moves between printing one character and the next. This distance is 
defined by the Horizontal Movement Index (HMI): if the HMI is n, then the 
distance moved is n/120 inches. Similarly, to set the Line pitch, you have to set the 
Vertical Movement Index (VMI): if the VMI is n, then the distance between one 
line and the next is n/48 inches. To use Character pitch 12 and Line Pitch 8, you 
therefore have to set an HMI of 10 (so that the distance moved is 10/120 = 1/12 
inch) and a VMI of 6 (so that the distance between lines is 6/48 = 1/8 inch). 


The escape sequence that sets the HMI to 10 is ESC US 11 (note how the number 
in the code is one more than the HMI you want to set) and the escape sequence that 
sets the VMI to 6 is ESC RS 7 (again, note how the number in the code is one more 
than the VMI you want to set). ESC is the familiar character with internal value 27; 
US and RS are the names of two more special characters (internal values 31 and 30, 
respectively); and the numbers are internal values. So you could set Character Pitch 
12 and Line Pitch 8 with the following statements: 


escapeS$=CHR$ (27) : usS=CHRS (31) :  xrsS=CHRS (30) 

hmi=10 : vmi=6 

LPRINT escape$;us$;CHR$(hmit+t1l);: REM set Character Pitch 12 
LPRINT escape$;rs$;CHR$(vmit+l);: REM set Line Pitch 8 


Fe a ee ee 
34 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 3: Real programming 


Example of using FX-80 codes 


The FX-80 printer uses individual escape sequences to set the different Character 
pitches and Line pitches. For example, the code that sets Character Pitch 12 is ESC 
M, whereas both the special character SI and the sequence ESC SI can be used to 
set Character Pitch 17. Similarly, the codes used to set Line Pitch 6 and Line Pitch 
8 are ESC 2 and ESC 0, respectively. 


The complication here is that, because 10 Pitch is the initial pitch used on these 
machines, the code used to set this pitch depends on the pitch that you are using at 
present. For example, if you are returning to 10 Pitch from 12 Pitch, the code to use 
is ESC P, but if you are returning to 10 Pitch from 17 Pitch, the code to use is the 
special character DC2. 


The codes used to set Character Pitch 12 and Line Pitch 8 are ESC M and ESC 0 
(zero), respectively. So you could use following statements to set this combination: 
escape$=CHR$ (27) 

LPRINT escape$;"M"; : REM set Character Pitch 12 

LPRINT escape$;"0"; : REM set Line Pitch 8 


The technique of using Print commands to control the screen and the printer 
described here isn't used by every version of BASIC you might use. Many 
have specific commands to carry out simple actions such as clearing the screen 
or positioning the cursor. These are simpler to use than control sequences but 
the advantage of the approach used in Mallard BASIC is that the same 
technique is used whatever action you require. Moreover, special screen and 
printer commands tend to be only suitable when you are using a particular 
computer, whereas Mallard BASIC can be used to control the screen and the 
printer on a very wide range of computer systems. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 35 





Chapter 3: Real programming 


36 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 4 
Building larger programs 


Although a program is simply a number of instructions contained in program lines, 
in many ways it is more than the sum of its parts. One of the major factors affecting 
the success of a program is the way that you organise the instructions in it to form 
the program. The organisation of the program (its structure) is the topic of this 
chapter. 


4.1 Compartmentalising a program 


Very short programs are usually easy to understand and follow; as long as you 
know what the individual instructions do, you can figure out what the whole 
program does — line 10 gets a value, line 20 multiplies it by 3, line 30 prints the 
result and so on. 


As soon as a program gets beyond about ten lines long or starts to use complex 
instructions, this is no longer the case. A program which is difficult to understand 
is difficult to write and doubly difficult to change or correct! 


The way to make a long or complex program easier to understand is to break it 
down into smaller chunks and label each chunk with what it does. 


To break a program into chunks, decide what separate stages the task consists of 
and write instructions to complete each stage in turn, but between each stage and 
the next, enter a program line consisting of just ' on its own. 


To indicate what a particular stage in the program does, use REM. This is a strange 
keyword — it simply tells BASIC to ignore the rest of the line! This allows you to 
type comments after the REM, usually to explain what is going on. 


You will see both methods being used throughout the example programs in the rest 
of Part 1. To give you a taste, contrast the following programs: 


10 title$ = "Markup program" 

20 markup = 0.5 

30 PRINT title$:PRINT 

40 INPUT "Product price";price 

50 INPUT "Product name";name$ 

60 markup.price = price* (1+markup) 

70 vat = 0.15 " 

80 INPUT "How many";number 

90 value = number*markup.price* (1+vat) 

100 PRINT "Your stock of ";name$;" should cost ";value 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 37 





Chapter 4; Building larger programs 





10 REM ** set up variables ** 
20 '! 

30 vat = 0.15 

40 markup = 0.50 


50 title$ = "Markup program" 
60 ' 

70 REM ** set up screen ** 
80 ' 

90 PRINT title$: PRINT 

100 '' 

110 REM ** get input ** 

120 '' 


130 INPUT "Product price";price 

140 INPUT "Product name";name$ 

150 INPUT "How many";number 

160 * 

170 REM ** calculate value including vat and markup ** 
180 ' 

190 markup.price = price* (1+markup) 

200 value = number*markup.price* (1+vat) 

210 * 

220 REM ** display value ** 

230 '' 

240 PRINT "Your stock of ";name$;" should cost ";value 


Although the second, neatly structured, program is somewhat longer, it is far easier 
to understand and check. For example, have you assigned the value to 'vat' before 
using it? In the first version, you have to hunt for an answer; in the second, all 
constants are assigned to variables in one place, making it easy to check. 


If you are going to write programs of any size or complexity, you should try to 
write them like the second version. Changing a program like the first will be a real 
nightmare! 


4.2 Sequences and loops 


The programs you have written so far have all been executed as a list of 
instructions, starting at the lowest line number and ending after executing the 
highest. There are however many ways to change the order in which program lines 
are executed. 


eee 
38 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 


The first of these is the GOTO command, which is followed by a line number: the 
target line. When this instruction is executed, BASIC continues execution from the 
target line specified rather than the next line in number sequence. 


This may seem a little silly at first glance, but try the effect of adding the following 
line to the example program named "MARKUP". Load the program which you 
saved earlier by typing: 


LOAD “markup" 
Now add the new line by typing: 
40 GOTO 10 


The complete program is now: 

10 INPUT"Type the item cost; then press RETURN",cost 
20 profit=0.2 

30 PRINT "The price to charge is ";cost+cost*profit 
40 GOTO 10 


Now run the program. See how much easier it is to use the revised program: if you 
want to calculate the price to charge for a number of items, instead of having to run 
the program once for each item, it is ready for you to type the next cost price as 
soon as it has displayed the charge price for the previous item. 


Repeating the same sequence of instructions over and over again like this is called 
‘looping’, with the repeated instructions called a ‘loop’. 


This revised version of the program using GOTO is all very well, but now the 
program never stops! The only way to get out of the loop is to press Control C, 
which immediately stops the BASIC program. 


While this approach is quite acceptable in a simple program like this, it does not 
help you to write programs where you want to leave the loop and carry on 
executing another part of the program. A far better solution is described below. 


Looping is used so frequently that BASIC provides commands to define and 
execute loops. 


The first type of loop starts with the command FOR and ends with the command 
NEXT. The simplest form of this loop is as follows: 


FOR counter=start TO finish 
instructions 


NEXT 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 39 





* 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 





When it executes the FOR instruction, BASIC sets the numeric variable counter to 
the numeric value start. It then checks whether counter is less than or equal to 
finish. I£ it is not, BASIC skips the whole loop. If itis, BASIC obeys the following 
instructions until it reaches the NEXT command, then adds 1 to the counter 
variable and checks whether its new value is greater than the numeric value finish. 
If not, the instructions inside the loop are executed again, counter is increased by 1, 
then tested against finish again. Only when counter is greater than finish does 
BASIC finish the loop and continue with the next instruction after the NEXT 
command. 


This type of loop is usually called a 'FOR...NEXT loop’, for obvious reasons. 


The FOR...NEXT loop is most useful when the number of times the loop should be 
executed is known at the start of the loop. For example, to print a column of 
asterisks down the screen: 

10 INPUT "How many asterisks";asterisks 


20 FOR a=1 TO asterisks 
30 PRINT "*" 


40 NEXT 


This type of loop is also very convenient if you want to keep a count of the number 
of times the instructions in the loop have been executed. For example, to program 
a ‘times table’: 

10 INPUT “What number times table do you want";times% 

20 FOR number%=1 TO 12 

30 PRINT number%*times% 

40 NEXT 


See how the counter variable is used not only to control the loop, but also to 
generate the output. 


4.3 Making decisions 


So far, we have seen how the computer can perform calculations, store and retrieve 
information, even repeat sequences of commands over and over. All very 
impressive, but not enough to program many tasks; remember the problem with 
leaving the loop created using GOTO, above? 


The vital missing link is the ability to make decisions. Without it, the computer can 
only function as a powerful calculator; with it, really versatile programs can be 
written which adjust their behaviour to the information they receive, even (in 
extreme cases) appearing to be ‘intelligent’. 


40 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 


4.3.1 Choosing alternative statements 


Decision-making in BASIC is mainly provided by the commands IF and ON. IF 
will be described first. 


IF: IF is followed by a ‘logical expression’ that BASIC can test, such as ‘count is 
greater than limit’. In its simplest form described here, if BASIC finds that the 
expression is true, it obeys the instructions following the keyword THEN on the 
line. If the expression is false, (for instance if count is 4 and limit is 6), these 
instructions will be skipped over and execution will continue on the next program 
line. 


This simple version of the IF instruction takes the following form: 


IF logical-expression THEN instructions 
— —_———" 
expression tested executed if true 


Note that the whole structure of the IF command, the logical expression, THEN 
and the instructions that depend on it must all be on the same program line. This is 
one of the instances when you will often need to include several instructions on the 
same line (by separating them with colons). 


In the example program named 'MARKUP'’, we could decide that to leave the loop, 
the user will type a cost price of zero. The logical expression to test if cost is equal 
to zero is 'cost=0'. To leave the loop we could use GOTO to carry on execution with 
a program line after the loop (line 50). Type the following additional lines: 


15 IF cost=0 THEN GOTO 50 
eee SS 
expression executed if true 


50 PRINT "And now for the rest of the program ..." 


The modified program is now: 

10 INPUT "Type the item cost, then press RETURN",cost 
15 IF cost=0 THEN GOTO 50 

20 profit=0.2 

30 PRINT "The price to charge is";cost+cost*profit 

40 GOTO 10 

50 PRINT "And now for the rest of the program ..." 


Try running the program to check that it works correctly. Try typing positive (or 
even negative!) cost prices and see that the looping continues. Type a cost price of 
0; this should display the message produced by line 50 and end the program. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 41 





Chapter 4: Building larger programs 





IF can also be followed by the keyword ELSE, which allows you to specify that a 
group of instructions will only be executed if the expression is not true: 


IF logical-expression THEN instructions-1 ELSE instructions-2 
——————_ 
expression tested if true if false 


For example, consider the following program fragment: 


90 ..5 3 

100 balance = balance + transaction 

110 IF balance<O THEN PRINT "**You're overdrawn**": PRINT 
"By ";-balance ELSE PRINT "You're in credit" : PRINT 
"With "sbalance 

120 INPUT "What next? (Q-quit, T-transfer, I-invoice)"; 

answer$ 
LO «ssa 


Line 110 uses IF...THEN...ELSE to print a different message depending on the 
state of your bank balance: 
THEN PRINT "**You're overdrawn**":;PRINT "By ";-balance 


IF balance<0O 


ELSE PRINT "You're in credit":PRINT "With ";balance 


Note that, as for IF...THEN, the whole structure of IF...THEN...ELSE must be on 
a single program line (though this can flow onto several screen lines). 


ON : The ON keyword is followed by a numeric expression, GOTO and a list of 
line numbers: 


ON numeric-expression GOTO linel , line2 , line3 , etc. 


The numeric expression is evaluated when the instruction is executed to yield a 
number n. If n is between 1 and the number of line numbers in the list, execution 
continues at the nth line number in the list. If n is less than 1 or greater than the 
number of line numbers in the list, execution continues with the next instruction. 


ON provides a neat way to select one from a number of choices. It is equivalent to 
a sequence of IF instructions: 


IF numeric-expression = 1 THEN GOTO linel 
IF numeric-expression = 2 THEN GOTO line2 
IF numeric-expression = 3 THEN GOTO line3 
etc. 


(ON is also used with a number of other commands. These are described later.) 


42 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 





4.3.2 The tests 


As described above, the Jlogical-expression is usually a statement of the 
relationship between variables and/or constants. This will usually use one of the 
following ‘relational operators’: 


a < b true if a is less than b 

a <= b true if a is less than or equal to b 

a = b true if a is equal to b 

a <> b true if a is not equal to b 

a >= b true if a is greater than or equal to b 
a > b true if a is greater than b 


Typical logical expressions are: 


countl < count2 
name$ = "" 

key <> pointer%*2+1 
file.absent.flag 


These logical expressions are evaluated by BASIC to produce either 0 (for false) or 
~1 (for true). You may also use a numeric constant or variable as a logical 
expression, which BASIC will consider as 'true' unless it has a value of 0. 


Logical expressions can also be combined and modified using logical operators. 
The most useful are NOT, AND and OR. 


NOT is used to invert the sense of a logical expression, so if 'a > 6' evaluates to 
‘true’, ‘NOT (a > 6)' evaluates to ‘false’. 


OR is used to combine two logical expressions; the result is 'true' if either (or both) 
are ‘true’. Thus, the result of '(1 = 2) OR (3 = 3)' is ‘true’ because while the first 
expression is ‘false’, the second is ‘true’. 


AND is used to combine two logical expressions; the result is 'true' only if both are 
‘true’. Thus, the result of '(1 = 2) AND (3 = 3)' is ‘false’ because while the second 
expression is ‘true’, the first is ‘false’. 


(The logical operators actually perform what are known as bitwise operations on 
the integer values of —1 and 0 BASIC uses to represent true and false. See Section 
5.1.5) 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 43 





Chapter 4: Building larger programs 


4.3.3 Controlling a loop 


IF causes BASIC to execute a group of instructions once if a condition is true. 
Another command, WHILE, is provided to make BASIC execute a loop while a 
condition is true. 


The WHILE loop is started by the command WHILE and ended by the command 
WEND. It takes the form: 


WHILE logical-expression 
instructions 


WEND 


When it executes the WHILE instruction, BASIC evaluates the logical-expression 
and if it is true, executes the instructions in the loop up to the WEND command, 
then evaluates the logical-expression again as if entering the loop for the first time. 
BASIC only skips the loop and continues with the instruction after the WEND 
command when the logical-expression is found to be false. 


The WHILE loop is ideally suited to situations where the number of times a loop 
should be executed is not known when it is started. As the WHILE logical 
expression is tested again each time the WEND is executed, all the programmer has 
to do is make sure that this expression evaluates to false when the looping should 
stop. 


4.4 Stopping the program 


Left to its own devices, a BASIC program only stops when the last program line 
has been executed. You can also stop it at any time by pressing Control-C — a sort 
of emergency stop! 


BASIC provides two commands to let the programmer make the program stop 
itself under different circumstances: END and STOP 


END stops the program just like it stops when it runs out of program lines. END is 
mainly used to stop the program when it has finished its intended tasks but there are 
more lines in the program. 


STOP stops the program and displays the number of the program line containing 
the STOP command. STOP is mainly used when testing a program that works 
incorrectly, to provide an easy way to check which parts of the program are being 
executed. (The command CONT can be used to make BASIC resume execution 
from where it stopped.) 


44 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 





4.5 Organising the program 


4.5.1 Review of program structure 


You have already met several different ways of controlling the order in which lines 
are executed. The first examples above executed each program line just once, in 
numerical order, rather like a straight road, running from start to finish: 


A ‘straight line’ program: 


SSS 


Next came programs that looped: the program still ran from start to finish, but 
along the way parts were repeated, rather like a road with a roundabout and a driver 
who couldn't decide which exit to take: 





A program with looping: 


Then came programs that made decisions; there was a fork in the road and the 
program took the left or right path depending on information it had been given or 
calculated when run: 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 45 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 


A program with decision-making 


These different structures suit different types of tasks: the ‘straight line’ for a simple 
‘one-off’ task; the loop for fixed repetitive tasks; the 'fork' for tasks whose details 
depend on the particular information received when the program is run. 


In designing a program, you will usually find that a combination of these elements 
is called for: you should choose the type of structure best suited to the particular 
stage in the task. 


4.5.2 Subroutines 


BASIC provides one other fundamental way of organising parts of a program, 
which is suited to tasks that require the same or a very similar sequence of steps in 
several parts of the program. This structure is provided by the commands GOSUB 
and RETURN, and is called a ‘subroutine’. 


Take the following program fragments: 


80 FOR A=1 TO entries% 

90 PRINT name$ (A) 

100 NEXT 

110 PRINT "***Press any key to continue***" 
120 WHILE INKEYS="":WEND 

130 PRINT:REM Blank line 


200 FOR A=1 TO queries 

210 PRINT equation$ (A), result (A) 

220 NEXT 

230 PRINT "***Press any key to continue***" 
240 WHILE INKEY$S=""":WEND 

250 PRINT:REM Blank line 


46 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 





You will see that lines 110 to 130 and 230 to 250 are identical, apart from their line 
numbers. This duplication seems a bit wasteful of typing effort and program space, 
even more so if it occurs more than twice in the program. A more efficient solution 
is to write the duplicated program lines just once, as a subroutine. A subroutine is 
simply a sequence of program lines that end with the command RETURN, that can 
be used (‘called') from anywhere in the rest of the program by using the command 
GOSUB followed by the line number of the first line in the subroutine. 


The subroutine should be kept away from the main part of the program to make 
sure that it will only be entered when the appropriate GOSUB instruction is 
executed. The best place is usually at the end of the program, after an END, as in 
the example below. 


Using subroutines, this program fragment becomes as follows: 


80 FOR A = 1 TO entries% 

90 PRINT name$ (A) 

100 NEXT 

110 GOSUB 1000 

200 FOR A = 1 TO queries 

210 PRINT equation$ (A), result (A) 

220 NEXT 

230 GOSUB 1000 

990 END 

999 REM * subroutine to pause until any key pressed * 
1000 PRINT "***Press any key to continue***" 
1010 WHILE INKEYS="":WEND , 
1020 PRINT:REM Blank line 

1030 RETURN 


GOSUB is rather like the GOTO command, except that when BASIC gets to the 
RETURN command at the end of the subroutine, it leaves the subroutine and 
continues execution with the next instruction after the GOSUB instruction that 
called it originally. If this is not clear, enter then run each of these two programs in 
turn: 


10 REM example demonstrating GOTO 

20 PRINT “First this, "+; 

30 GOTO 60 

40 PRINT "This instruction never executed" 
50 END 

60 PRINT "then this, because of the GOTO" 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 47 





Chapter 4: Building larger programs 





10 REM example demonstrating GOSUB 

20 PRINT "First this, "; 

30 GOSUB 60 

40 PRINT "and finally this, after the subroutine has finished" 
50 END 

60 PRINT "then this, from the subroutine " 

70 RETURN 


Subroutines can also be used when the program lines are not exact duplicates, by 
intelligent use of variables and condition testing. For instance, if the messages 
required in the above example were different, the particular message required 
could be assigned to a string variable before calling the subroutine, with the 
subroutine printing that string variable rather than a fixed message. 


Subroutines don't just help you write more compact programs. They also make it 
easier to correct or improve your programs, because you only need to change the 
subroutine, rather than the many occurrences of the duplicated code throughout the 
program. 


GOSUB may also be used with the ON keyword, to select one from a list of 
subroutines, depending on the value of a numeric expression. The instruction takes 
the form: 


ON numeric-expression GOSUB linel, line2, line3, etc. 


The numeric expression is evaluated when the instruction is executed to yield a 
number n. If n is between 1 and the number of line numbers in the list, execution 
continues at the nth subroutine in the list. If m is less than 1 or greater than the 
number of line numbers in the list, the whole instruction is skipped. 


4.5.3 Program design using modules 


Subroutines can also be used to write programs that don't have a great deal of 
duplication, providing a good way of compartmentalising the program. Writing 
programs this way makes the program much easier to design, develop and 
understand, by allowing you to break down the task into a hierarchy of subtasks. 
For example, consider the following task: 


48 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 





Task: print an order 


prepare process orders tidy up 


set up printer set up variables loop get order print order print formfeed 


getname getamount construct text check space print text 


Each level in the hierarchy can then be translated into a subroutine. The highest 
level is very simple: 

10 GOSUB 1000:REM prepare 

20 GOSUB 2000:REM process orders 

30 GOSUB 3000:REM tidy up 

40 END 

50 REM) *kkkkkKAKKKKEK = SUBROUTINES  ** eR K KARR 





Each of these major subroutines can now be designed and coded. For example, the 
main processing subroutine could be: 


2000 REM **x* process orders *** 

2010 INPUT "To prepare an order, type Y RETURN",answer$ 
2020 WHILE answer$="Y" 

2030 GOSUB 2100:REM get order 

2040 GOSUB 2500:REM print order 

2050 INPUT "Another order? type Y RETURN for yes"; answer$ 
2060 WEND 


2070 RETURN 


Another level down the hierarchy: 
2100 REM ** get order ** 

2110 GOSUB 2200:REM get name 
2120 GOSUB 2300:REM get amount 


2130 RETURN 


And another: 

2200 REM * get name * 

2210 INPUT "Type the client name followed by RETURN",name$ 

2220 IF name$="" THEN GOTO 2210 

2230 RETURN 

2300 REM * get amount * 

2310 INPUT "Type the amount, followed by RETURN", amount$ 

2320 IF amount$="" THEN GOTO 2310 

2330 amount=VAL (amount$) 

2340 IF amount <= 0 THEN PRINT "The amount must be 
positive":GOTO 2310 

2350 RETURN 


And so on... 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 49 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 


By segmenting the program in this way, you can make sure the structure of the 
program reflects the structure of the task, which in turn makes it easier to find the 
part of the program that is of interest. 


It also allows you to write the program a bit at a time. Starting from the top, you 
write only one level down at a time, checking that each level works correctly before 
proceeding to the greater detail of the next level. This makes it easier to spot and 
correct errors, because you will always know the level which they have developed 
on. 


The flow in a program using a subroutine can be summarised graphically as: 


4.5.4 User-defined functions 


Subroutines provide a convenient way of ‘packaging’ instructions. BASIC provides 
another rather similar facility for packaging expressions, called ‘user-defined 
functions’. These are functions that can be used (‘called’) anywhere that a BASIC 
function could be, once they have been defined in the program using a DEF FN 
instruction. 


DEF FN is used in an instruction consisting of four parts: 

DEF FNfunction-name (parameter-list) = function-expression 
The user function call takes the form: 

ENfunction name (list-of-values) 


The function name is chosen by the programmer and can be any valid variable 
name. 


The parameter list (which must be in round brackets) consists of one or more 
variable names (‘formal parameters’), separated by commas. When the function is 
used, these variables are assigned the values in the corresponding positions in the 
function call. Note that these variables are entirely separate from any variables of 
the same name used anywhere else in the program. 


50 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 4: Building larger programs 


The function expression can be any valid expression, but will usually use the 
values passed to it in the formal parameters to calculate a result. This result is 
passed back as the result of the user-defined function. 


The ‘list of values’ is a number of values (constants, variables, or expressions), 
separated by commas. There must be the same number of these values as formal 
parameters in the corresponding function definition and they must be compatible 
types ie. both numeric or both string. 


Typical functions and function calls (using the example screen control codes) are: 


10 DEF FNvat (gross) =gross-gross/1.15 
20 cost = 100 
30 PRINT "The vat on a vat-inclusive item costing ";cost; 
"is ";FNvat (cost) 


10 DEF FNmean (n1,n2)=(n1+n2) /2 

20 highest%=42:lowest%=3 

30 average=FNmean (highest%, lowest%) 
40 PRINT average 


10 esc$=CHRS (27) 
20 REM for a VT52 computer 
30 DEF FNscreen$ (x,y, text$) =esc$ + "Y" + CHRS (y+32) + 
CHRS (x+32) +text$ 
40 INPUT "Message ";message$ 
50 INPUT "Column ";col% 
60 INPUT "Row ";row% 
70 PRINT FNscreen$ (col%, row%,message$) 
80 GOTO 40 


10 log2 = LOG(2) 

20 DEF FNlog2(x) = LOG(x)/log2 

30 INPUT "Positive number ";number 

40 PRINT "Logarithm to base 2 is ";FNlog2 (number) 
50 GOTO 30 


When it is executed, the user function definition does not do anything other than 
define the function. It must be executed before the user function can be used. It is 
usual to group function definitions all in one place, either at the start of the program 
or in an initialisation subroutine. 


User-defined functions provide a convenient but very limited alternative to 
subroutines when the processing required can be encapsulated into a single 
expression. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 51 





Chapter 4: Building larger programs 


52 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 5 





Manipulating information 


BASIC functions and operators have been introduced so far in an order and to a 
depth designed to suit the reader who is entirely new to BASIC. 


This chapter describes functions in a little more detail, gathered into logical groups, 
so you can easily appreciate what facilities are provided in any particular area. It is 
probably not worth reading about facilities that don't sound relevant to your 
particular needs, especially if this is your first time working through this user 
guide; you can always return to them later. 


This is not a complete description of the facilities available: the more complex or 
less useful functions are either not described at all here, or are only described in 
outline. For further information on any of the functions and operators, see Part II. 


5.1 Manipulating numeric information 
5.1.1 Arithmetic 


The facilities that you will use most frequently with numeric information have 
already been described: the arithmetic operators of addition (+), subtraction (-), 
multiplication (*) and division (/). 


These operators all apply equally well to integers and floating point (single and 
double precision) arithmetic. There are two further operators, particularly suited to 
manipulating integers: \ which is used for integer division (it converts the numbers 
to integers before dividing and returns an integer result) and MOD, which returns 
the remainder after performing an integer division: 


PRINT 7/2 

3.8 

PRINT 7\2 

3 

PRINT 7 MOD 2 
1 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 53 





Chapter 5: Manipulating information 


5.1.2 Signs 


To ensure that a number (expression, variable) is positive, use ABS. This converts 
a negative or positive number to a positive number of the same size. 
To determine the sign of a number (expression, variable), use SGN. This returns 0 


if the value is 0, —1 if it is negative, +1 if it is positive. This provides a convenient 
way of ‘compressing’ a value's range, for example: 


100 state$(0) = "overdrawn" 
110 state$(1) = "nil stock" 
120 state$(2) = “in stock" 


200 state = SGN(stock(item))+1 
210 PRINT nameS(item);" is ";stateS$ (state) 
etc. 


5.1.3 Logarithms and exponentiation 


There are two logarithmic functions, providing natural logarithms (LOG) and 
logarithms to base 10 (LOG10). 


To convert a natural logarithm back to the corresponding number, use EXP. 


To raise a number to a power, use the exponentiation operator, T. For example, to 
print 7 to the 4.4th power: 

PRINT 7 T 4.4 

To convert a logarithm to base 10 back to the corresponding number, use 10Tx 
(where x is the logarithm). 

Note: On many systems, the character you use for the exponentiation operator is “ 
and in the rest of this manual, we use “ rather than T because it is the character in 
more general use. When you are using a PCW, simply substitute T for “ wherever 
it appears. 


5.1.4 Trigonometry 


BASIC provides three trigonometric functions, for converting angles (expressed in 
radians) into cosines, sines and tangents: COS, SIN and TAN. Each takes a single 
numeric argument, in brackets. For example: 


opposite = adjacent*TAN (theta) 





54 Mallard BASIC; Introduction 


Chapter 5: Manipulating information 


There is also a single function to convert a tangent back to an angle (in radians): 
theta = ATN(opposite/adjacent) 


You can, of course, create further trigonometric functions from these three simple 
functions. For example, if you need the cotangent of an angle, you can obtain this 
by putting 1/TAN (theta) into your expression. 

Yet more trigonometric functions can be produced with the help of the other 
BASIC functions introduced in this chapter. For details, see Appendix IX — or any 
good mathematics book! 


5.1.5 Bitwise operations 


A number of operators are provided to manipulate integer numeric information at 
the level of individual bits. The most useful are: 


NOT number — invert each bit in the number 

number] AND number2 — set bits to 0 unless 1 in both numbers 

number] OR number2 — set bits to 0 unless 1 in either or both numbers 
numberl XOR number2 — set bits to 0 unless 1 in one number, 0 in the other 


These operators are often used in relational expressions, to invert the sense of a 
test, for example: 
WHILE NOT EOF (file%) 
INPUT #file%,name$ 
WEND 


(Also see EQV and IMP in Part II.) 


5.1.6 Random numbers 


It is occasionally useful to be able to generate a number whose value you cannot 
easily predict — a 'random number’. This is often required in statistical analysis, 
when generating passwords, or programming games. It is very difficult to generate 
entirely random numbers. The BASIC function RND generates 'pseudorandom' 
numbers in the range 0...1: these numbers are in an entirely predictable, but rather 
obscure sequence which will be good enough for most purposes. In general, each 
time you use RND, you get the next number in the sequence. 


So if, for example, you want a random number between 0 and 5, you could obtain 
this by using: 


random.number = RND*5 


(Also see RND and RANDOMIZE in Part II.) 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 55 





Chapter 5: Manipulating information 


5.1.7 Maxima and minima 


If you want to pick out the highest value from a list, use MAX. For example: 
PRINT "The winner is  ";MAX(mark(1),mark(2),mark(3),mark (4) ) 


If the values are negative, the highest is the one which is least negative. 


Similarly, to pick out the lowest (most negative) number from a list, use MIN. 


5.2 Manipulating textual information 


5.2.1 Assigning to string variables 


To change the whole of a string variable, you will usually use an equals sign: 
new.stringS= "New, new, new" 


The alternative is to use the special keywords LSET and RSET. These assign one 
string to another in such a way that the length of the string is preserved by adding 
extra spaces either at the end of the string (LSET) or at the beginning (RSET). 
LSET and RSET are chiefly used to assign strings to the ‘fields’ of the records in a 
random access file. They are described in Chapter 6, on using disc files. 


To change part of a string variable, use MID$ on the lefthand side of an 
assignment: 


dateS = "xxxx March, 1986" 

MIDS (date$,1,4) = "21st" 

PRINT date$ 

21st March, 1986 

The parameters to MID$ specify the string variable, the starting position and the 
number of characters to be replaced. 


5.2.2 Joining strings 


The only operator that can be used with strings is the addition operator '+', which 
adds the string to its right onto the end of the string to its left. Note that this is quite 
different to adding two numeric values — contrast the result of executing the two 
following instructions: 


PRINT "123"+"456" 
PRINT 123+456 


56 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 5: Manipulating information 


5.2.3 Splitting strings 
BASIC provides three functions to extract part of the text from a string: LEFT$, 
MID$ and RIGHTS. 

— To extract the first n characters from a string, use LEFTS(text$,n). 

— To extract the last n characters from a string, use RIGHT$(text$,n). 

— To extract n characters starting from position s in a string, use 
MID$(text$,s,n). (The first character in the string is at position 1.) 
To extract all the characters from position s to the end of the string, use 
MIDS(text$,s). 


5.2.4 Generating strings 


Two functions are provided to generate strings by repeating a single character. 





To produce a string of n spaces, use SPACE$(n). 
To produce a string of n characters with internal value c, use STRING$(n,c). 
To produce a string of n characters "z", use STRING$(n,"z"). 


For example (where 42 is the internal value of *): 


PRINT STRINGS (20,"*") ;"Hi!"; STRINGS (20, 42) 
FO III IO ICI IO II EDI III II III I ICI 


5.2.5 String length 


A string can be anything from 0 to 255 characters long. BASIC provides a function, 
LEN, that returns the length of the string that is its argument. This is particularly 
useful when you need to process the string a character at a time, such as in the 


following routine, which displays the string in tit 1e$ double-spaced across the 
screen: 


100 characters = LEN(title$) 
110 FOR a = 1 TO characters 
120 PRINT MIDS (title$,a,1);" "; 
130 NEXT 

140 PRINT 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 57 


Chapter 5: Manipulating information 


5.2.6 Searching strings 


To check whether a string contains a particular sequence of characters, you can use 
INSTR. This takes the form: 


INSTR ([start, ]string]$, string2$) 


Start specifies where the string is to be searched from; if this is omitted or set to 1, 
the whole string will be searched. 


String1$ is the string to search. String2$ is the string to search for in string/$. 


INSTR returns a numeric result. If the result is 0 then string2$ was not found in 
string1$. Otherwise, the result returned is the position in string1$ of the first 
occurrence of string2$ at or after the start. 


This function has a number of uses not immediately apparent. For example, in the 
following it is used to cater for the user typing options as upper or lower case 
letters: 


100 PRINT "A=abort, B=begin again, R=retry. Press a key" 
110 answer$ = INKEYS 

120 IF answer$ = "" THEN 110 

130 code = INSTR(1,"AaBbRr", answer$) 

140 IF code = 0 THEN GOTO 100 

150 ON code GOSUB 500,500, 600, 600, 900, 900 


5.2.7 Converting strings 


Text strings, unlike keywords, will be stored as upper and lower case if that is how 
they are typed. BASIC provides two functions to convert strings from upper case 
(capitals) to lower case and vice versa. 


To convert a string to all upper case, use UPPER$(string). To convert a string to all 
lower case, use LOWERS(string). For example: 

PRINT UPPERS ("February 1986 Accounts BOOK") 

FEBRUARY 1986 ACCOUNTS BOOK 


fot Yat 


Note that this conversion does not affect any symbols other than the letters 'a'—'z' or 
‘AZ’. 

Characters in text strings can have internal values in the range 0 to 255, but only 
characters 0-127 are defined by the ASCII standard. You may occasionally need to 
use strings in which the top bit has been set (for example, as a parity bit) but should 
now be ignored: use STRIP§(string) to ensure that you are only using codes in the 
range 0 to 127. 


58 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 5: Manipulating information 





5.3 Converting between different 
types of information 


This section describes the functions provided to convert information between the 
four main forms in which it is stored: string, integer, single and double precision. 


Many conversions are performed automatically — for instance, an integer value can 
simply be assigned to a double precision variable, or a double precision value to an 
integer variable without using any conversion function. There are two main reasons 
for using conversion functions: to convert between incompatible data types 
(numeric and string) and to force a particular conversion when it would not 
normally occur. 


5.3.1 Converting between string and numeric 


The individual characters in strings are stored as single bytes, with values in the 
range 0...255. A different character is displayed for each value. The value 
corresponding to a particular character is called the character's internal value. For 
example, the letter 'A' has an internal value of 65, the letter "B' 66 and so on. 


The function ASC returns the internal value for a given character, so that PRINT 
ASC("A") would print 65. 


The function CHR$ returns the character with a particular internal value, so that 
PRINT CHR$(65) would print A. 


Although numeric values are converted to the text equivalent automatically when 
printed, you cannot use strings as numbers or vice versa. To use a string (such as 
"1234") as a number, or a number (such as 1234) as a string, you must use a 
conversion function. 


To convert a number to exactly the same representation as would be used to print it, 
use STR$, for example: number$ = STRS (number) 


To convert a text representation of a number to a number, use VAL, for example: 
number = VAL (number$) 


Other functions are provided to convert numeric values to formatted decimal 
strings, octal and hexadecimal strings. See DEC$, OCT$ and HEX$ in Part II. 


Other functions are also provided to convert numeric values to and from compact 
string representations for use with disc data files. These are described in Section 
6.3. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 59 





Chapter 5: Manipulating information 


5.3.2 Converting between integer, single and 
double precision 


When a numeric value of one type is assigned to a numeric variable of a different 
type, it is automatically converted to suit the new type. However, there are two 
occasions when you may want to use conversion functions: when the numeric 
value is not being assigned to a variable so conversion would not normally take 
place, and when the conversion that would take place is not as you want. 


When assigning a floating point value to an integer, the value will normally be 
rounded to the nearest integer with the integer further away from zero being chosen 
in the case of a tie. Thus 4.5 would round to 5, while 4.49 would round to 4. 


To convert a numeric value to integer, single or double precision (as if assigning it 
to a variable of that type), use CINT, CSNG or CDBL respectively. This may be 
needed to force an expression to be evaluated in a particular precision; for example, 
compare: 


Type a# = 1/10 with Type a# = CDBL(1)/10 
Type PRINT a# Type PRINT a# 
0.1000000014901161 0.1 


In the first case the division is performed using single length arithmetic giving a 
single length result, which is then converted to double length when it is assigned to 
the double length variable A#. In the second case the CDBL in the expression 
converts the dividend to double length before the division, which means that the 
division is performed using double length arithmetic, giving a double length result. 
(Incidentally, the first case illustrates the inexact representation of decimal 
fractions as binary ones, by printing the single length value of 0.1 to sixteen 
decimal digits rather than the usual seven.) 


Functions are also provided to round the floating point part of a number in other 
ways. These are INT, FIX and ROUND. The number remains floating point. 


To round a number to the smaller integer, use INT. INT (3.9) will produce 3, 
while INT (-3.9) will produce 4. 

To round a number by simply losing the decimal part, use FIX. FIX(3.9) will 
produce 3, while FIX (—3.9) will produce —3. 

To round a number to a specified number of decimal places, use ROUND 
(number , places) . For example, ROUND (3.335,2) would produce 3.34 while 
ROUND (-3.335,2) would produce —3.34. If omitted, places is taken as 0, so 
ROUND (3.335) produces 3. 

If places is negative, it is taken as the number of figures to round to the left of the 
decimal place; for example, ROUND (12345,-2) will produce 12300. 


60 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6 


Using discs for information 
storage 


The facilities that have been described so far cover most programming needs but are 
not entirely suited to a major class of tasks that BASIC can be used for: the storage 
and processing of large amounts of information, such as personnel records, stock 
lists, address books etc. 


So far, discs have only been described as a way of storing programs for later use, but 
in fact, they can also be used to store information, as a kind of extension of the 
computer's memory. Information is stored on discs by writing it from variables to 
named files called ‘data files’. 


Using data files to store information has a number of advantages and disadvantages 
compared to using variables: 


Files Variables 

Information preserved until deliberately Information easily lost, eg. when the 
erased or file deleted computer is turned off 

Limited by disc capacity Limited by computer memory 
Easily shared between programs Not easily shared between programs 
Access time varies between nearly Nearly instantaneous access 
instantaneous and several seconds 

Information must be transferred to Information can be used directly 
variables before it can be used in in instructions 

instructions 


To summarise, data files provide a way of preserving information so it can be easily 
used later with the same or other programs, but take a little more effort and time to 
use than variables. 


BASIC provides three types of data files, to suit different applications: ‘sequential’, 
‘random access’ and ‘keyed access’. 


A sequential file is used rather like a DATA statement, containing information in the 
sequence it was written to the file, which must be read in that sequence. 


Arandom access file is used more like an array, with each element numbered; to read 
or change a particular element, you simply specify its number. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 61 





Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


Keyed access files are rather like random access files, but let you choose the element 
you want much more conveniently, by using text 'keys’ such as a surname or stock 
description. 


Sequential and random access files are described in this chapter; keyed files are 
described in Chapter 7. 


6.1 General disc commands 


BASIC provides a number of commands to help you use discs that, although useful 
when manipulating data files, also have a wider use. 


While using the computer's operating system you have access to commands for 
listing, deleting, renaming and typing files. BASIC provides similar facilities 
through keywords with the same names and arguments: 
— To list files on a disc: DIR constant, eg. DIR *.BAS 
— To delete files on a disc: under CP/M, ERA constant, eg. ERA TEST. * 
under MSDOS, DEL constant, eg. DEL TEST. * 
— Torename a file: under CP/M, REN constant=conStant, eg. REN NEW=OLD 
under MSDOS, REN constant constant,eg. REN OLD NEW 
— To display the contents of a file: TYPE constant, eg. TYPE INFO.DOC 


If you use the MSDOS 2 version of Mallard BASIC, then you can include path-names 
as well, just as if you were using the operating system itself. 


For details of these commands and the significance of their arguments, see guides to 
the operating system you are using. 


The above BASIC commands are followed by constant text without double quotes, 
just like the operating system commands. BASIC provides equivalent commands 
that take string expressions as their arguments; the meaning of the argument is the 
same, but you can use the command just like a normal BASIC command like LOAD. 
These commands are FILES, KILL, NAME AS and DISPLAY: 

— To list files on a disc: FILES string, eg. FILES file.list$ 


— To delete files on a disc: KILL string, eg. KILL" * . TMP" 
— To rename a file: NAME string AS string,eg. NAME oldnameS AS 
newname$ 


— To display the contents of a file: DISPLAY string, eg. DISPLAY 
name$+type$ 





62 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


BASIC provides another command, RESET, which you should use before changing 
discs. This tells the operating system that the disc is about to be changed and 'closes' 
any open files (Section 6.2). 


There is also a function, FIND$, which you can use to check files on a disc. It returns 
anull string if the file is not there, or a string containing information on the fileif found 
(see Part II). For example, to check if a file is on the disc: 


IF FIND$(file$) = "" THEN PRINT file$;" not found" 


6.2 Sequential access files 


Sequential access files are the simplest form of data file and so will be dealt with first. 
Each of the keywords needed to use sequential files will be described first, followed 
by an example program to illustrate how they work together. 


Sequential files can be created and read, but not changed (directly). 


6.2.1 Creating a sequential file 


Creating a sequential file involves three stages: 
— opening the file 
— writing information to the file 
— closing the file 
The file cannot be read until it has been closed. 
Opening the file Before you can write to a sequential file, you must tell BASIC 
about it by opening the file using the keyword OPEN: 
OPEN "0", #file-number , file-name 


The "O" is the 'file access mode’ and stands for output. This tells BASIC to create an 


entirely new file, deleting any existing file with the same name. Other modes ("I","R" 
and "K") are described elsewhere. 


Note that you cannot change parts of an existing sequential file. 


The file number is an integer in the range 1-3, which you will use in all subsequent 
instructions to refer to this file. This number must not be the same as the file number 
for any other file which is open. (The upper limit of 3 can be changed using the 
MEMORY command or the /F parameter with the command used to load BASIC — 
see Part II.) If you need to open more, you will have to close some of the files already 
open (see CLOSE below). 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 63 





Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


The file name is the complete name, including file type, that the operating system will 
use for the new file. This file must not be already open. If it already exists, it will be 
erased. 


The file stays open until you close it (using CLOSE, RUN, BUFFERS, RESET or 
SYSTEM). You must not remove the disc on which the file has been opened until it 
has been closed. 


Writing information to the file Once the file has been opened for output, you 
can place information in it using the keywords PRINT # and WRITE #. 


Each of these keywords is followed by the file number, a comma, then a list of data 
items (variables, constants or expressions) which will be written to the file. For 
example: 


PRINT #addressfile%,name$ (i) ,address$(i),phone% (i) 
PRINT # behaves almost exactly as PRINT, allowing the use of USING, SPC and 


TAB to format the output to the file. The only important difference is that PRINT # 
does not expand Tab Control codes (Internal value 9) to spaces. 


WRITE # is somewhat similar to PRINT #, but writes the data items to the file 


separated by commas, ignores print zones and writes strings surrounded by double 
quotes. WRITE # does not allow the use of TAB, SPC or USING keywords. 


The difference may be more obvious after the following examples, in which 
constants have been used for clarity: 

PRINT "Name", "Address"; "Telephone"; 1234 

would be displayed as: 

Name AddressTelephone 1234 


PRINT #file%,"Name", “Address";"Telephone";1234 
would be stored exactly the same, as: 

Name AddressTelephone 1234 

while 

WRITE #file%,"Name", "Address", "Telephone"; 1234 
would be stored as: 

"Name", "Address", "Telephone", 1234 


The need for these two different formats of output will only become apparent when 
you understand the way that information is read from a sequential file. 





64 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


You are strongly advised to use WRITE # initially, as this automatically produces 
files which are easy to read correctly using INPUT #. 


Each time a WRITE # or PRINT # instruction is executed for the file, the additional 
information is written to the end of the sequential file, until the file is closed. 


(The information is not written to the file immediately, but initially stored in a small 
area of memory called a ‘buffer’. The contents of the buffer are only written to the disc 
when the buffer becomes full, or when you close the file. This buffering process 
makes programs more efficient, by reducing the number of times the disc drive has 
to be accessed.) 


Closing the file When you have finished writing to the file, you should close it 
using the keyword CLOSE. This has four main effects: 

— ensures that all information written to the file is actually transferred to it 

from the buffer 

— allows the file to be opened for reading 

— frees that file number for re-use 

— frees resources assigned to that file so another can be opened 
To close all files that are open, use CLOSE on its own. To close particular files, use 
CLOSE followed by a list of file numbers, separated by commas. For example: 
CLOSE client.file,stock.file 


All open files are closed automatically when any of the following commands are 
executed: RESET, RUN, BUFFERS and SYSTEM. 


6.2.2 Reading from a sequential file 


Reading from a sequential file involves three stages: opening the file, reading the 
information and closing the file. 


Opening the file Before you can read from a sequential file, you must tell BASIC 
about it, using the keyword OPEN: 


OPEN "I", #file-number , file-name 


The "I" is the access mode (input). Other modes ("O", "R" and "K") are described 
elsewhere. The file number is an integer in the range 1—3, which you will use in all 
subsequent instructions to refer to this file. This must not be the same as the file 
number for any other file already open. (The upper limit of 3 can be changed, as 
described above.) 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 65 





Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


If you need to open more files, you will have to close some of those already open (see 
CLOSE below). 


The file name is the complete name, including file type, that the operating system will 
use to find the file. You cannot open a file for input if it does not exist or is currently 
open for output. 


The file stays open until you close it (using CLOSE, RESET, RUN, BUFFERS or 
SYSTEM). You must not remove the disc on which the file has been opened until it 
has been closed. 


Reading information from a sequential file After opening the file for input, 
you can read information from it using the keyword INPUT #. This is followed by 
the file number, a comma, and a list of variables to which the information read will 
be assigned. For example: 


INPUT #file%,name$ (i) ,address$(i),count (i) 


Information is read from the file in strictly sequential order (hence 'sequential file’): 
the first variable in the first INPUT #n instruction will be assigned from the first value 
in the file, the second variable from the second value, and so on. It is not possible to 
re-read an item; to do so, you must open the file for input again, then read items until 
you reach the required item again. 


The information in a sequential file can be used in two main ways: 


— by reading all the data items from the file into suitable arrays, then ignoring 
the file and using the information in these arrays. This technique can only 
be used if all the information will fit into the computer memory at the same 
time, but is generally worthwhile as the particular items of interest can then 
be reached very quickly, in any order. It is particularly suited to tasks such 
as ‘looking up’ information in a file or reorganising information before 
printing or changing a file. 


— by reading data items from the file sequentially, using each item or 
sequence of related items in turn before reading the next. This technique can 
be used with files of any size, as only the items just read need to be stored, 
but limits processing to those 'current' items. It is particularly suited to tasks 
like totalling figures, copying or printing an entire file. 


The type and order of variables in an INPUT # instruction is largely dictated by the 
structure of the file, which is in turn determined by the instructions used to create it. 





66 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





The simplest way to use sequential files is to create them with WRITE #, then read 
the information back with INPUT #4, using the same variable types in the same order 
when creating and reading the file. For example, if the file was created using: 
FOR i = 1 TO 10 

WRITE #file%,name$(i),address$ (i) ,telephoneS (i) 
NEXT 
then the information could be read back using: 


FOR entry = 1 TO 10 
INPUT #file%,client$(i),address$ (i) 
INPUT #file%, phones (i) 

NEXT 


Note that you need not use the same names for the variables and the variables need 
not be grouped exactly the same in the WRITE # and INPUT # instructions, just be 
written and read in the same order. 





It is not even necessary to use exactly the same variable types as long as they are 
compatible (ie. both numeric or both string), and you are prepared to accept the 
rounding that may occur. 


(If you want, you can even create files so that numeric data can be read back into 
numeric OR string variables. This is done by using the PRINT # command: refer to 
Part II for details.) 


If you try to read beyond the last data item in a file, this will generate an error. If you 
know how many items there are in the file when you write the program to read it, you 
can easily ensure that this limit is not exceeded, as in the example above. Failing this, 
it is entirely feasible to adopt a convention of always writing a unique value as the 
last entry in a file, then testing each item read against this. 


However, BASIC provides a more elegant solution, in the form of the function EOF. 
EOF (file%) returns the value 0 while there are more items to be read from the file 
and —1 when the last item has been read. For example, to print all the entries in a file 
named "testfile.seq”: 
files =1 
OPEN "I", #file%, "testfile.seq" 
WHILE NOT EOF (file%) 

INPUT #file%,item$ 

PRINT item$ 
WEND 


(The keyword NOT is used here to invert the result of EOF (f£ile%) so that the 
WHILE loop will continue until the end of the file has been reached.) 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 67 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





Closing the file When you have finished reading a file, you should close it using 
the keyword CLOSE. This is not as important as closing a file which has been opened 
for output, but has three main effects: 


— allows the file to be opened for output 
— frees that file number for re-use 
— frees resources assigned to that file so another can be opened 


To close all files that are open, use CLOSE on its own. To close particular files, use 
CLOSE followed by a list of file numbers, separated by commas. For example: 


CLOSE client.file,stock.file 


All open files are closed automatically when any of the following commands are 
executed: RESET, RUN, BUFFERS and SYSTEM. 


6.2.3 Changing a sequential file 


BASIC does not provide you with facilities to change a sequential file directly. If you 
want to change a sequential file (ie. add to, delete or alter information in it), you must 
do so by creating an entirely new version, from information read from the old version 
and the changes required. 


If the file is small enough, read the entire file into memory, change the information 
then write the revised version back to the disc, as illustrated in the phone book 
example below. 


Alternatively, you can read information from the file in batches, creating a new 
version with a different name in stages. 


Certain types of change can however be made easily using the random access 
facilities described in Section 6.3. 





68 Mallard BASIC; Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


6.2.4 Example programs 


The following programs illustrate typical uses for sequential files. Don't be put off 
by their apparent triviality: they have been kept simple deliberately to avoid 
obscuring the salient points. 


Example 1: simple statistical analysis 


(This example illustrates the simplest way to use a sequential file—reading it an item 
at a time, using each data item immediately.) 


The task: The task is to total, count and average all the numerical data entries in a 
sequential file, then print this information together with the maximum and minimum 
values read, when the whole file has been read. The average should reflect the average 
magnitude ie. ignore the signs of the numbers, but all other results should be based 
on the signs. 





The data in the file might be financial transactions, number of people at football 
matches, temperatures; it doesn't matter what. The data items will all be numbers, 
positive or negative, integer or floating point, in the range -9999.999 to +9999 999. 
The file may have between zero and twenty thousand entries. The name of the data 
file will be supplied by the user when the program is run. 


If you want to test your understanding of the facilities described so far, attempt 
to design and write the program now, without reading any further. 


The design: Since none of the processing requires access to previously read data, 
there is no need to try to store the data from the file in an array, which is just as well 
as larger files would not fit! 


The program will consist of the following stages: 


— set up variables and screen 

— choose disc 

— choose file 

— read and process entries 

— finish calculations and print results 
— tidy up 





Mallard BASIC; Introduction 69 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





The Program: The following is one way of coding the functions required by the 
design. 


10 REM example 1 - simple statistical analysis 
20 REM *** set up variables *** 


30! ' 

40 file%=1: minimum = 10000: maximum = -10000 
50 

60 PRINT "Statistical analysis program" 

TO ! 

80 REM *** choose disc *** 

90: ' 

100 FILES 


110 PRINT "If the file you want to analyse is not on this disc," 
120 PRINT "change discs then press C." 
130 PRINI "If this is the right disc, press any other key 
to continue" 
140 ig =" 
150 WHILE i$ = "" 
160 i$ = INKEYS 
170 WEND 
180 i$ = UPPERS$S(i$): IF i$ = "C" THEN RESET: GO TO 100 
190 ' 
200 REM *** choose file *** 


210 '' 
220 INPUT "Type the data file name, followed by RETURN"; filename$ 
230 IF FINDS (filename$) = "" THEN PRINT filename$; " IS 

NOT ON THE CURRENT DISC — TRY AGAIN": GOTO 220 
240 '' 
250 REM *** read and process entries *** 
260 ' 


270 PRINT "Analysing ";filename$;" - PLEASE WAIT": PRINT 
280 OPEN "I", #file%, filenames 

290 WHILE NOT (EOF (file%) ) 

300 count = count + 1 

310 INPUT #file%,number 

320 total = total + number 

330 total.absolute = total.absolute + ABS (number) 

340 minimum = MIN (number, minimum) 

350 maximum = MAX (number, maximum) 

360 WEND 





70 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


370 

380 REM *** finish calculations and print results *** 

390 ' 

400 IF count% = 0 THEN PRINT filename$;" is empty":GOTO 500 
410 average = total.absolute/count% 

420 PRINT "RESULTS FOR FILE ";filename$:PRINT 

430 PRINT "Final total:";TAB(40) ;total 

440 PRINT "Average absolute value of an entry:";TAB(40) ;average 
450 PRINT "Minimum value was:";TAB (40) ;minimum 

460 PRINT "Maximum value was:";TAB (40) ;maximum 

470 ' 

480 REM *** tidy up *** 

490 '! 

500 CLOSE #file% 

510 END 


You should find that this program is largely self-explanatory. The only part that is 
slightly complex is lines 140-170. These use the INKEY$ function to check the 
keyboard over and over again until a key has been pressed, and then pass that key, 
stored in i$, to line 180. 





While this program is a reasonable solution, it is by no means perfect. For example, 
the user has to press Control-C to quit, the variables should perhaps be double 
precision, the results could be formatted more neatly. Try enhancing the program 
along these lines. 


Testing: The final stage in developing the program should be to test it, in as realistic 
amanner as possible. As you haven't got any of the files that the program is designed 
to work with, you must generate them. In keeping with the simple task, a simple 
program to generate a simple test file: 


1 REM testl 

10 OPEN "0",1,"test1l.seq" 
20 FOR a = 1 TO 10 

30 WRITE #1,a,-a 

40 NEXT 

50 CLOSE 1 


Run this program to generate the test file, then analyse it using the analysis program. 


The ideal test produces results that you can easily check by independent means while 
pushing the program to its designed limits. A single test will rarely satisfy both aims. 
This simple test produces results that you can easily check by doing a little arithmetic, 
but does not include the number nor the wide range of numeric values that the 
specification requires the program to be able to cope with. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 71 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


To save you the trouble of the arithmetic, the results should be: 


Final total: 0 

Average absolute value of an entry: Bind 
Minimum value was: -10 
Maximum value was: 10 


Example 2: phone book 


(This example shows how to use a sequential file to set up an array for processing in 
memory, reading and writing the file when needed.) 


The task: The task is to provide a ‘phone book’, which will give the phone number 
corresponding to aname typed by the user, and allow the user to add names and phone 
numbers to the 'book'. To keep the program simple, other useful facilities such as 
editing existing entries and printing a sorted phone list will not be provided. 


When specifying a name to search for, upper and lower case are to be considered 
equivalent, the whole name need not be specified and all entries matching the name 
will be displayed. 


The maximum number of entries will be 100. The longest phone number (including 
the STD code) will be 12 digits. The STD code can be stored as integral part of the 
number. The longest name will be 30 characters. 


The phone book file will have a fixed name. 


If you want to test your understanding of the facilities described so far, attempt 
to design and write the program now, without reading any further. 


The design: As the number of entries is fairly small, the whole file can be read into 
an array in memory for ease and speed of processing. For the same reason, there is 
no need to sort the entries into a particular order; the computer can find any particular 
name quickly by checking each element in turn. 


Part of the design is deciding the way that the information will be stored. There are 
three types of information in the file: the names and phone numbers (obvious) and 
the relationship between a name and a phone number. This could be stored 
in a number of ways: 





72 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





— asa list of names, list of phone numbers (the third name has the third 
number) 
— asa list of entries consisting of a name followed by its phone number 


— asa list of entries consisting of aname plus a list of indices to the phone 
numbers in a subsequent list (eg. "AdAstra Inc",4,7 means that AdAstra Inc 


has phone numbers 4 and 7 in the phone number list) 


There is not much to choose between the first two methods. The third, while more 
complex, can cater better for more complex situations (such as one name having 
several phone numbers, or several names having a shared phone number). ‘ 


The program will consist of the following stages: 


set up variables and screen 
read file and store entries 
ask for and carry out instructions (search by name, add an entry, finish) 


write file and tidy up 


The program: The following is one way of coding the functions required by the 
design. Note in particular that the program cannot change the phone book file as such; 
it must change the information held in memory, then write the file all over again! 


10 REM example 2 - phone book 

Z20) ' 

30 REM **** set up variables **** 

40 DIM name$ (100) , phone$ (100) 

50 phone.file$ = "phone.seq": filet = 1 

60 false = 0: true = -1 

70 file.changed = false 

80 PRINT "Phone book" 

90 '' 

100 REM **** get data **** 

110 GOSUB 290 

120 * 

130 REM **** get commands **** 

140 command = 0 

150 WHILE command < 5 

160 PRINT "Phone book ";entries;" entries" 

170 PRINT : PRINT "Search for number, Add a number or 
Finish(S/A/F)" 

180 match$ = "SsAaFf": GOSUB 850: command = answer 

190 ON command GOSUB 460, 460,580,580:GOSUB 940 

200 WEND 

210 * 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 73 





Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





220 
230 
240 
250 
260 
270 
280 
290 
300 
310 
320 
330 
340 
350 
360 
370 
380 
390 
400 
410 
420 
430 
440 
450 
460 
470 
480 
490 
500 
510 
520 
530 
540 
550 


560 
570 
580 
590 
600 
610 
620 
630 
640 
650 


74 


REM KKKK finish KkKKK 
IF file.changed = true THEN GOSUB 710 
END 
iT 
REM * * * * * * SUBROUTINES * * * * * x 
REM *** read file *** 
REM ** check if there first! ** 
IF FIND$(phone.file$) <> "" THEN GOTO 370 
PRINT "No phone book file on this disc." 
PRINT "Change disc or start New phone book (C/N) ?" 
match$ = "CcNn": GOSUB 850 
IF answer = 3 OR answer = 4 THEN entries = 0: RETURN 
GOSUB 800: GOTO 290 
' 
REM ** read entries ** 
PRINT: PRINT "Reading phone book: please wait" 
OPEN "I", #£ile%, phone.file$ 
entries = 0 
WHILE NOT (EOF (file) ) 
entries = entries + 1 
INPUT #file%,name$ (entries) , phone$ (entries) 


WEND 

CLOSE file% 

RETURN 

REM *** search *** 

IF entries = 0 THEN PRINT "Phone book empty!!!": RETURN 


PRINT "Type name to search for followed by RETURN," 

INPUT “or just RETURN to skip search", search$ 

IF search$ = "" THEN RETURN 

count = 1 

WHILE count <= entries AND name$(count) <> search$ 
count = count + 1 

WEND 

IF count > entries THEN PRINT search$;" not 

found" : RETURN 

PRINT "Phone number:";phone$ (count) :RETURN 

' 

REM *** add entry *** 

IF entries >= 100 THEN PRINT "No room!!!": RETURN 

PRINT "Type name to add followed by RETURN," 

INPUT "or just RETURN to skip entry";name$ 

IF name$ = "" THEN RETURN 

PRINT "Type phone number to add followed by RETURN," 

INPUT "or just RETURN to skip entry"; phone$ 

IF phone$ = "" THEN RETURN 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





660 entries = entries + 1 

670 name$(entries) = name$ 

680 phone$ (entries) = phone$ 

690 file.changed = true: RETURN 

700 ' 

710 REM *** write file *** 

720 PRINT: PRINT "Writing phone book: please wait" 
730 OPEN "0", #file%, phone.file$ 

740 FOR count = 1 TO entries 

750 WRITE #file%,name$ (count) , phone$ (count) 
760 NEXT 

770 CLOSE #file% 

780 RETURN 

790 '' 

800 REM * change disc * 

810 RESET 

820 INPUT "Insert disc with phone book on and press RETURN",a$ 
830 RETURN 

840 ' 

850 REM * get key * 

860 answerS = "" 

870 WHILE answer$ = "" 

880 answer$ = INKEYS 

890 WEND 

900 answer = INSTR(match$, answer$) 

910 IF answer = 0 THEN GOTO 860 

920 RETURN 

930 ' 

940 REM * wait for key * 

950 PRINT: PRINT "Press any key to continue" 
960 WHILE INKEYS = "" 

970 WEND 

980 RETURN 


Again, this program is by no means perfect. For example it will not find aname if you 
type it in capitals when the phone book has it in small letters, or if you do not type 
the complete name. Similarly, when you add an entry, it does not check if there is 
already an entry with the same name, it simply places it at the end of the file. 


Try changing the program to correct these deficiencies. (HINTS: Use UPPER$ or 
LOWERS$ to convert the entry being compared and the search string to the same case. 
Use LEN and LEFTS$ to allow incomplete names to be found. Search through the 
array each time when adding and replace an existing entry that matches, only adding 
new ones to the end, but be careful to adjust the ‘entries’ count accordingly.) 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 75 





Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


Testing: To test the program, run it to create anew phone book and add a few entries. 
Run it again, to check that it finds the existing phone book. Try all three commands 
to see if they work. If you've got a lot of patience, check that it will handle the limit 
of 100 entries correctly! 


6.3 Random access files 


Random access files are quite similar to sequential files: they also have names, 
must be opened before they are used, can have information written to or read from 
them and should be closed after use. 


Random access files have two major advantages: the information in them can be 
read in any order (hence random rather than sequential access) and that information 
can be changed, also in any order. (Information in sequential files can only be read 
in the order that it was written and cannot be changed directly — you must read the 
file into memory (in one go, or in chunks), changing any information that must be 
altered while it is in memory, then write it back to a new file on the disc.) 


These differences make random access files more convenient and easier to use than 
sequential files for many applications. Against these advantages, random access 
files are a little more difficult to understand and use properly, and tend to take up 
more space on the disc for the same amount of information. 


Information is stored in a random access file rather differently, too. In a sequential 
file, each data item is written or read separately and the different items can have 
different lengths. The items read from or written to a random access file are called 
‘records’. All the records in a file have the same fixed length. Each record can 
consist of a single data item (just like a sequential file) or a number of data items 
that are handled together. 


Records provide a neat way of storing related pieces of data. For example, in a 
personnel file, there could be a record per person, containing the following data 
items: 

— Name (30 characters) 

— Address (50 characters) 

— Phone (10 characters) 

— NI number (9 characters) 

— Date of birth (6 characters) 

— Pay scale (1 character) 

— Insurance scale (1 character) 


Keeping all this related information together makes a lot of sense! 


76 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





To indicate the particular record that you want to read or write, you use its position 
in the file — its 'record number’. The first record is number 1, the second number 2, 
and so on. This is rather like the way you use array variables, by specifying the 
index (eg. name$ (2) ). In fact, you can use random access files rather like arrays 
of variables, which are no longer limited in size by the computer memory and can 
be shared easily between programs! 


Random access files are often used to hold information on individual items, such as 
people, companies or products with one or a fixed number of records being used 
per item. Programs can then be designed to allow the users quickly and easily to 
select record(s) to view, change, print etc. The best way to design a file for this type 
of application is to position records in the file according to some numeric 
information that users associate with the item, such as an employee's code or an 
item's stock number. If this is not possible, you will usually have to write down the 
record number for each item, and have users specify the information required by 
this number, so that 'ACME Motor Insurance’ becomes company 1,'ACME 
National’ company 2, etc. (Keyed files provides a much more elegant solution 
however — see Chapter 7!) 





6.3.1 Creating a random access file 
A random access file is created in five separate stages: 
— opening the file 
— defining the record layouts 


assigning data to the record 
— writing the record to the file 
— closing the file 
Each of these will now be described in turn. 
Opening the file Before you can write information to a random access file, you 
must open it using the keyword OPEN: 
OPEN "R", #£ile-number , file-name 
For example: 
OPEN "R",#3,"person2.fil" 
The "R" indicates that the file is open for Random access (rather than "O" — 
sequential Output, or "I" — sequential Input, or "K" — Keyed access). 


The significance of the file number and file name is as described for opening a 
sequential file, above. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 77 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


You can also include another parameter at the end of the instruction to specify the 
record size required, if the usual size of 128 characters is not acceptable, ie: 


OPEN "R", file-number , file-name , record-size 
This allows you to use disc space more efficiently when the data in each record is 
significantly less than 128 characters. It also allows you to use larger record sizes 


when 128 characters is not enough, but you must first change the maximum buffer 
size using MEMORY - see Part II. 


Opening a file for random access creates it, if it does not exist already, like opening 
it for sequential output. However, if the file already exists, it is not deleted by 
opening it for random access. This allows you to add or change information in a 
random access file, as described below. It does mean that if you want to be sure of 
creating an entirely new random access file, you should check if there is a file with 
the same name on the disc first and delete it if found (using FIND$ and KILL as 
described above). 


Opening a random access file makes BASIC reserve a space in memory for it, 
called a ‘record buffer’. This is the same size as the record length (usually 128 
characters). It is here that BASIC will assemble the information that you want to 
write for each record. Each file opened for random access has its own record 
buffer. 


Although it is possible to open a random access file which is already open, this is 
not recommended. 


Defining the record layouts Information is placed in the record buffer (to 
prepare the record for writing to the file) by assigning it to special variables, called 
‘field variables’. These are a special form of string variable, set up using a FIELD 
instruction. This defines the record layout by dividing the record buffer up into 
individual areas(fields), each of which is identified by a field variable. 


The FIELD instruction takes the form: 

FIELD #file-number , field-size AS field-variable| , field-size AS field-variable] 
For example: 

FIELD #3, 10 AS name$, 30 AS address$, 10 AS phones 


The file number is the number that you used to open the random access file; note 
that the record layout is only usable with this one file; it is not automatically 
available for all files. 


The field size specifies the number of characters that the field variable will have 
reserved for it in the record. Field variables must be string variables. The total 
number of characters (ie. the sum of all the field sizes in the instruction) must not 
exceed the record length (usually 128, but see OPEN in Part II). 





718 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


Note that the FIELD instruction does not write any information to the file, it simply 
labels parts (fields) of the record with the field variable names, to make it easy for 
you to set up records for writing to the file (see below). Any previous information 
stored in these field variables is lost; they immediately take the current contents of 
their field in the record. 


You can define as many record layouts as you like for the file, so that you can write 
records with quite different layouts to the same file. For example, in the personnel 
file described above, you might occasionally want to use a different record type — 
a ‘continuation record' — for an employee with a complex address. You would then 
need to define two different record layouts. 


The main record type: 

FIELD #perfile%’, 30 AS name$, 50 AS address$, 10 AS 
phone$, 9 AS ni.number$, 6 AS birth.date$, 1 AS 
pay.scale$, 1 AS ins.scale$, 1 AS cont.record$ 


The ‘continuation record’ type: 
FIELD #perfile%, 108 AS address.cont$ 


Field variables are rather special because of their fixed length (as defined in the 
FIELD instruction) and should only ever be assigned as described below. 


Assigning information to a record Information is placed in a record by 
assigning it to one of the string variables that have been associated with the file by 
a previous FIELD instruction. 


This assignment must always take one of the following three forms: 

LSET field-variable = string-expression 

RSET field-variable = string-expression 

MIDS (field-variable, start, length) = string-expression 

Assigning to a field variable using any other method breaks its association with the 
file, and uses it as a normal string variable again. The value assigned to the variable 
is not placed in the record buffer. 


The LSET command assigns characters from the string expression to the field 
variable, left justified. If the string expression is shorter than the field variable, 
spaces will be added to its (righthand) end to fill the field. If the string expression 
is longer than the field variable, the surplus characters (at the the righthand end) 
will be discarded without error. 


The RSET command behaves similarly, except that spaces will be inserted at the 
lefthand end if the string expression is too short. 


The MID$ command assigns length characters from the lefthand end of the string 
expression to the field variable, starting from start. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 79 





Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


For example: 
FIELD file%,20 AS name$ 
After: 
LSET names = TOI IO IO IOI IO I IOI IOI IK ak dk mt 
name$ is: TIO IO IK IO IO I a 
After: 
LSET name$ = "Anne Elizabeth" 
name$ is: "Anne Elizabeth " 
After: 


RSET names "Catherine Louise" 
names is: i Catherine Louise" 


And then after: 

MIDS (names, Ze 3) = VKKKKKKKKKKKKKAKKAKKKA 

name$ is: " *k*xCatherine Louise" 
Numeric information can be assigned to a field by first converting it to the 
equivalent string: 
LSET number$ = STRS$ (count) 
However, this can be a very inefficient way to store numbers; for example, an 
integer such as —-30000 that BASIC stores in two bytes would take up 6 characters 
in a file using this method. Also, some accuracy may be lost when converting from 
the internal binary representation to decimal. BASIC solves both potential 
problems by providing three functions for converting numeric information to a 
more compact 'string' form: MKD$, MKI$ and MKSS: 


— To convert a double precision number to an eight-character string, use 
MKD$ (number). 


— To convert a single precision number to a four-character string, use 
MKS$(number). 


— To convert an integer to a two-character string, use MKI$(number). 
For example: 
LSET number$ = MKI$ (total) 
These ‘strings’ will not display or print correctly. 
Complementary functions are provided to convert these strings back to the numeric 
form (CVD, CVI and CVS) and are described in more detail below. 


(Information can also be assigned to the record using PRINT #n or WRITE #n, but 
that will not be described further here; see Part II for details.) 





80 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





Writing the record Having opened a random access file, defined a record 
layout for it and assigned data to that record, you are now ready to write the record 
to the file. 


Records are written using the keyword PUT, which takes the form: 

PUT #file-number 

or 

PuT #file-number , record-number 

The file number is the file number you used originally when opening the file. 


Use the first form to write the file rather like a sequential file; each record is written 
after the last one written using PUT (or read using GET — see below). This is the 
quickest way to write a random access file, as the disc drive does not have to keep 
finding different parts of the file. 





The second form will mainly be used when changing an existing file or creating a 
file with a complex structure. The record number is the position that you want the 
record to have in the file. Note that the length of the file is dictated by the highest 
record number written to it and the record length (usually 128 characters); if you 
write a single record using PUT #£i1e%, 1000 then there will be 1000 records in 
the file — 999 unused and one used! 


Writing a record to the file does not change the record buffer; this is only changed 
by assigning to the field variables or reading the file using the same file number. 


Closing the file A randorn access file should be closed when you have finished 
writing it, just like a sequential file, to ensure that all the information has been 
written to the disc. 


To close all files that are open, use CLOSE on its own. To close particular files, use 
CLOSE followed by a list of file numbers, separated by commas. For example: 


CLOSE #client.fil, #stock.fil 


6.3.2 Reading a random access file 


A random access file is read in five separate stages: 
— opening the file 


defining the record layouts 
— reading records from the file 
using the information from the record 


closing the file 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 81 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


Opening the file Before you can read information from a random access file, 
you must open it using the keyword OPEN: 

OPEN "“R",#file-number , file-name 

For example: 

OPEN "R", #3,"person2.fil" 


The "R" indicates that the file is open for Random access (rather than "O" — 
sequential Output, or "I" — sequential Input, or "K" — Keyed access). 


The significance of the file number and file name is as described for opening a 
sequential file, above. 


You can also include another parameter at the end of the instruction to specify the 
record size required, if the usual size of 128 characters is not acceptable, ie: 
OPEN "R", #file-number , file-name , record-size 

This will usually be used when reading a file that was created with a record size of 


other than 128 characters, as it is usual (although not essential) to use the same 
record sizes when reading and when writing a file. 


Defining the record layouts The simplest way to read a file is to define the 
record length and record layouts to be the same as those used to write it. In this 
way, you can be sure to read the information back the way it was written. There are 
good reasons for reading a file with a different record length, or with a different 
record layout, but they are beyond the scope of this introduction. 


Record layouts are defined using FIELD, exactly as described for creating a file, 
above. 


Reading records from the file To read data from a random access file, you 
must first read the record containing it, using the command GET: 


GET #file-number 

or 

GET #file-number , record-number 

Using GET without a record number reads the next record after the last one read 
(using GET) or written (using PUT) using this file number. If the file has only just 
been opened, it reads the first record (record number 1). 


Using GET in this way you can treat a random access file a little like a sequential 
file. 


Using GET with a record number you can read any record in the file. 


82 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


Detecting the end of a random access file is a little more difficult than for a 
sequential file. You can still use the EOF function, but must read the file at least 
once before doing so. Also, EOF may return a ‘true’ value even when you have not 
attempted to read beyond the end of the file, if the record you have just read was 
never written to (ie. is an empty record). 


In practice, this means that if a program needs to be able to find the end of a random 
access file, that file must either be of a fixed length (which the program knows), or 
each record in the file must have been written to when it is created (using a suitable 
null value for empty records, such as spaces or binary zeros). 


Using information from the current record Information from the last record 
read for a particular file number is used by using the field variables as normal string 
variables. Note that the contents of these variables will change as soon as another 
record is read using this file number. 


If there is more than one record layout defined for this file number, you can use the 
field variables from the different layouts in any combination. 


Numeric information written to the file in the compact string form by using the 
MKD$, MKI$ and MKS$ functions should be converted back to the equivalent 
numbers using the complementary functions CVD, CVI and CVS: 


— To convert a double precision string to double precision number, use 
CVD(string). 

— To convert a single precision string to a single precision number, use 
CVS(string). 

— To convert an integer string to an integer, use CVI (string). 


(Information can also be read from the record using INPUT #, but this will not be 
described further here.) 


Closing the file When a program has finished reading a random access file, it 
should close it using the keyword CLOSE. 


To close all files that are open, use CLOSE on its own. To close particular files, use 
CLOSE followed by a list of file numbers, separated by commas. For example: 
CLOSE #personnel%, #paye% 


Although not as essential as when the file has been written or changed by the 
program, closing the file releases its record buffer and other system resources for 
use with other files. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 83 





Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


6.3.3 Reading, writing and changing a random 
access file 


As remarked above, the instructions used to open a random access file and define 
record layouts are exactly the same, whether the file is going to be read from or 
written to. In fact, you can easily read, change, then rewrite records when working 
with a random access file, by simply combining the keywords introduced above. 
This is illustrated by the following example program. 


6.3.4 Examples 


Example 3 —- simple personnel file 
The task: To create, maintain and interrogate a simple personnel file. The file to 
be able to handle up to 500 personnel. The information to be stored is: 
— Employee number (3 digits) 
— Name (30 characters) 
— Address (50 characters) 
— Phone (10 characters) 
— NI number (9 characters) 
— Date of birth (6 characters) 
— Pay scale (1 character) 
— Insurance scale (1 character) 


The facilities required are: 
— add a record 
— delete a record 
— replace a record 
— display a record 
Records to be selected by employee number. 
If you want to test your understanding of the facilities described so far, 
attempt to design and write the program now, without reading any further. 


The design: The maximum amount of information to be handled (approximately 
50,000 characters) precludes storing the data in a sequential file and processing it 
in memory, as does the need to be able to update the records easily. 





84 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 


Using a random access file to store the data, the record format must be decided 
next. Since records will be requested by employee number, the obvious order in 
which to put records is by that number. Since the employee number is 3 digits, this 
would produce a file of 999 records, which would be half full if the design limit of 
500 employees is reached. This seems acceptable, so there is no need for more 
complex code: the record number for an employee will be the employee number. 
Note that this means that the employee number does not need to be stored in the 
record as it is given by the record number! 


The overall design, then, is: 


set up variables and screen 


open file and set up record layouts 
ask for and carry out instructions 
close file and tidy up 





The program: The example program below has been kept deliberately simple so 
as not to obscure the use of the random access keywords. 

10 REM example 3 - personnel file program 

20 ' 

30 REM ****set up variables**** 

40 file’ = 1: limit = 500 


50 ' 

60 REM **x*uyser-defined functions**** 

10: * 

80 DEF FNhead$(title$) = STRINGS ((74-LEN(title$))/2,"*") + 
" "+ titleS + "  " + STRINGS ((76-LEN (title$))/2,"*") 

90 ''! 

100 REM ****set up screen**** 

120 * 

120 PRINT FNhead$("Personnel files") 

130 '' 

140 REM ***xset up file**** 

150 ' 

160 IF FINDS$("person.rnd") = "" THEN GOSUB 1100 


ELSE OPEN "R", #file%, "person.rnd" 
170 FIELD file%, 30 AS rec.name$, 50 AS rec.address$, 10 AS 
rec.phone$, 9AS rec.ni$, 6 AS rec.birth$, 1 AS rec.pay$, 
1AS rec.ins$ 
180 FIELD file%,128 AS records 
190 ''! 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 85 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





200 
210 
220 
230 


240 
250 
260 
270 
280 
290 
300 
310 
320 


330 
340 
350 
360 
370 
380 
390 
400 
410 
420 
430 
440 
450 
460 
470 
480 
490 
500 
510 
520 
530 
540 
550 
560 
570 
580 


590 
600 


REM ****get a record**x* 
’ 
PRINT: PRINT 
INPUT "Type personnel number (1 to 500), 
then RETURN"; person 
IF person <1 OR person >limit THEN GOTO 230 
, 
PRINT FNhead$ ("Personnel number"+STR$ (person) ) 
PRINT 
GET file%,person 


REM ****get and obey an instruction**** 
' 
IF rec.name$ = STRINGS (30," ") THEN GOSUB 430 
ELSE GOSUB 520: PRINT: PRINT 


prompt$ = "Press F to finish or C to continue" 
match$ = "FfCc":GOSUB 1220 

IF answer >2 THEN GOTO 220 

| 

REM ****tidy up**** 

| 

CLOSE 

PRINT cls$ 

END 


REM ****subroutines**** 
' 


REM ***xempty record options*** 

PRINT "This employee not known" 

match$ = "YyNn":prompt$ ="Add new record (Y/N)":GOSUB 1220 
IF answer = 1 OR answer = 2 THEN GOSUB 800 

RETURN 


REM ***existing record options*** 
, 


REM **print record** 

PRINT "Name: ";rec.name$ 

PRINT "Address: ";rec.address$ 

PRINT "Phone number: ";rec.phoneS;TAB(40);"Date of 

birth: ";LEFTS (rec. birth$,2);"/"; MIDS (rec. birth$, 3,2); 

"/";RIGHTS (rec. birth$, 2) 

PRINT 

PRINT "Nat. Ins No.: ";rec.ni$;TAB(30);"Pay scale: "; 
rec.pay$;TAB(60); “Ins. scale: ";rec.ins$ 





86 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





620 
630 
640 
650 
660 
670 
680 
690 
710 
720 


730 
740 
750 
760 
770 
780 
790 
800 
820 
830 
840 
850 
860 
870 
880 
890 
900 
910 
920 
930 
940 
950 
960 
970 
980 
990 
1000 
1010 
1020 
1030 
1040 


REM **offer and obey options** 

match$ = "CcDdPpSs" 

prompt$ = "Change, Delete, Print or Skip (C/D/P/S)" 
GOSUB 1220 

ON answer GOSUB 800,800,690, 690,1320,1320 
RETURN 

REM ***delete current record*** 


match$ ="YyNn" 

prompt$ = "About to delete record. Type Y to delete, N 
not to" 

GOSUB 1220 

IF answer >2 THEN RETURN 

LSET record$ = "" 

PUT #file%, person 

PRINT "Record deleted" 

RETURN 

tS 

REM ***add/change record*** 

INPUT "Name" ;name$ 

INPUT "Address"; address$ 

INPUT "Phone number"; phone$ 

INPUT "Date of birth: day in month";day$ 

INPUT "month in year";month$ 

INPUT "year (last 2 digits)";year$ 

INPUT "Nat. Ins No";ni$ 

INPUT "Pay scale"; pay$ 

INPUT "Ins. scale";ins$ 

match$ = "YyNn" 

prompt$ = "OK? Press N to retype, Y to continue" 

GOSUB 1220 

IF answer > 2 THEN 820 





LSET rec.name$ = nameS 
LSET rec.address$ = address$ 
LSET rec.ni$ = ni$ 
LSET rec.pay$ = pay$ 
LSET rec.ins$ = ins$ 
MIDS (rec. birth$,1,2) 
MIDS (rec. birth$, 3,2) 
MIDS (rec. birth$,5,2) 


RIGHTS ("0"+day$, 2) 
RIGHTS ("0"+month$, 2) 
RIGHTS ("O"+year$, 2) 


ll 


1050 LSET rec.phone$ = phone$ 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 87 


Chapter 6: Using discs for information storage 





1060 PUT #file%,person 
1070 PRINT "New/changed details written" 
1080 RETURN 
1100 REM ***create empty file*** 
Bs i 
1120 PRINT "Creating empty file - please wait" 
1130 OPEN "R",#file%, "person .xrnd" 
1140 FIELD file%,128 AS record$ 
1150 LSET record$ = "" 
1160 FOR a = 1 TO 500 
1170 PUT #files 
1180 NEXT 
1190 PRINT "File created" 
1200 RETURN 
1210 
1220 REM **get key** 
1240 PRINT: PRINT prompt$ 
1250 answer$="" 
1260 WHILE answer$ = "" 
1270 answer$= INKEYS 
1280 WEND 
1290 answer = INSTR(match$,answer$) : IF answer = 0 
THEN GOTO 1250 
1300 RETURN 
i3sl0 ' 
1320 REM **print record** 
1340 LPRINT "Personnel record for employee number";person 
1350 LPRINT WK KKKKAKKKKEKKKKKKKKKEKKKKKEKKKKKKKKEKKKEKAKKKN 
1360 LPRINT "Name: ";rec.name$ 
1370 LPRINT "Address: ";rec.address$ 
1380 LPRINT "Phone no: ";rec.phone$;TAB(40);"Date of 
birth: ";LEFTS (rec. birth$,2) ;"/";MIDS (rec. birth$,3,2) ; 
"/";RIGHTS (rec. birth$, 2) 
1390 LPRINT 
1400 LPRINT "Nat Ins No: ";rec.ni$;TAB(30);"Pay scale: "; 
rec.pay$; TAB(60);"Ins. scale: ";rec.ins$ 
1410 RETURN 
Many desirable facilities have been omitted, such as checking the validity of dates 
typed, being able to print lists of personnel records or find personnel by 
information other than the employee name. You may care to design and implement 
these enhancements yourself. 
Testing: Devise tests to check the basic functions of the program; that it creates a 
personnel file when there isn't one on the disc, doesn't when there is, and that the 
record display, add and delete facilities work correctly. 


88 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7 


Keyed access files for 
data bases 


The Random access files described in the previous chapter let you pick out 
information from the file in any order, so they could well be used to store data bases 
such as address lists, personnel files etc. However, Mallard BASIC offers a very 
much better way of storing data bases — Keyed access files. 


The problem with using Random access files for data bases is that they work in the 
same way as arrays. To pick out a particular piece of information, you need to 
know its number in the file — just as you have to know which element of an array 
contains the value you want. This method of selection is fine when the items of 
information are arranged in a nice tidy order or there are few enough items of 
information that you can search through until you find the information you want, 
but it is not very practical when you have the amount of data you typically find in 
a data base. Then, your only hope of finding a piece of information is by keeping an 
index. 


Creating and maintaining an index is not a simple proposition. You would have to 
set up a separate file to hold the index and then arrange for your program to search 
through the current index, sort new entries into alphabetical order, merge them with 
the existing index, and store the new version of the index each time you added 
anything to the data base. 


With Keyed access files, an index is automatically created and maintained for you. 
Moreover, these files use a very sophisticated type of index called a B*—-tree which 
reduces the effort your computer has to make to find a record. It also ensures that 
your records are sorted into alphabetical order of keyname: you don't need to have 
a special (complicated) sorting program to do this for you. 


To pick out pieces of information from a Keyed access file, you simply quote one 
or more of the 'Keys' that have been associated with the information you want. For 
example, if the data file is an address list, you might have chosen to tag Fred 
Smith's address in Yorkshire with the keys 'Smith' and 'Yorkshire' — so that you can 
pick out the full information by telling BASIC to look for Smith or Yorkshire, or 
both Smith and Yorkshire as appropriate. 


Each Keyed file is actually two files: a Data file and an Index file. The Data file is 
essentially a Random access file, holding all your information. The Index file is a 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 89 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


special file that holds all the keys in up to eight different indexes, known as Ranks. 
Mallard BASIC lets you deal with the Data file and the Index file as though they 
were one file. 


We can represent the Data and Index files as follows: 


Index entries Data records 





Each entry in the Index file just consists of the key value itself plus a pointer to the 
appropriate record in the Data file — the record number. An individual index entry 
can only point to one data record, but a number of index entries can point to the 
same data record. 


Programs involving Keyed files use standard BASIC commands to control how the 
program works, but special ‘Jetsam’ commands to read and write the Keyed files. In 
fact, many of these commands are special versions of standard BASIC file 
handling commands — OPEN, GET, PUT, CLOSE, etc. The extra commands that 
are involved are ones to flip through the index to see what's there. 


The actual order of the records in the Data file never affects how you use a Keyed 
file because you never search through the data file itself; all your searching is 
through the index. It is the order of the keys in the Index file and the fact that the 
keys are in alphabetical order that are important. 


The last key that was looked up in the Index file and the record that this pointed to 
have an important role in Keyed file handling. Together they define the Current 
position in the Keyed file. When you design a program that uses a Keyed file, it 
helps to be aware of how the Current position will change as you work through the 
program. As a rule, changes to the Keyed file are made at the Current position and 
so a number of the special Jetsam commands either need you to set the Current 
position first or change it themselves. 


The commands that work with Keyed files all require you to set a ‘lock’. This tells 
BASIC whether you want exclusive use of the file (or of a particular record) or 





90 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


whether other users may read the file while you are working on it. The lock is only 
needed for multi-user systems where you could have a number of people wanting 
to use the same file at the same time. It is included in all versions of these 
commands so that programs can readily be transferred between single-user and 
multi-user systems. In this chapter, we will be simply specifying exclusive access 
to both files and records because a program that uses exclusive locks throughout 
will work in the same way on a multi-user system as it does on a single-user one. 
How to use locks on multi-user systems is described in Part II, Section 9.2. 


Writing a program that uses Keyed files 


Any program in which Keyed files are used has three main stages: 


— an initial preparatory stage, in which an area of memory is allocated for 
manipulating the Keyed file, the Keyed file is opened and the record layout 
is defined 


— the main part of the program in which the Keyed file is searched and 
updated 


— a final stage, in which the Keyed file is closed. 


This final closing stage might seem a refinement but it is in fact very important. 
The way Keyed files are handled means that there are times when the Index and 
Data files stored on disc are slightly out of step. If you were to stop at that point, 
your data base would no longer be correct. When the file is closed correctly, both 
files are brought fully up to date. Rather than let you pull the wrong information out 
of the data base (probably unnoticed), BASIC won't let you use a Keyed file that 
wasn't correctly closed the last time it was used — so be careful! 


To illustrate how to write these different parts of the program, we shall now write 
a simple data base program that reads an address list keyed by name, adds new 
entries and deletes entries that are no longer required. So that the Keyed file 
handling isn't obscured, the program won't worry about vetting the input or any of 
the other refinements that you might build into a ‘real’ program. 


Don't worry if you don't understand all the elements of this program. You will still 
get a good idea of how to go about the task and the example can be used as a model 
for when you want to write your own data base program. 


Note: Data base programs as a rule work with existing files and so you need to use 
a separate program to set up the Keyed file in the first place. This program just has 
to Create the Keyed file, defining the length of the records in the file, and then close 
the file again. (The process of creating the file also opened it.) 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 91 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


Our example program uses a Keyed file made up of the Index file ADDRESS.KEY 
and the Data file ADDRESS.DAT. The program to create this Keyed file would be: 
10 files=1: recleng%=122 : lock%=2 

20 CREATE #file%, "ADDRESS.DAT", "ADDRESS.KEY", lock%, recleng% 
30 CLOSE #file% 

40 END 

Here £ile% is the file number (ie. the number that will be used to refer to the file 
for the remainder of this program) and recleng% is the length (in bytes) of the 
records we will be using in the file. The lock% may be set to 0, 1 or 2, 
corresponding to the different types of lock that can be applied to a file (see Part II). 
The lock we set here, 2, specifies exclusive access to the file and is the one we 
recommend using on single-user systems. 


Type in this program, use it to create the new files (on the disc in the current default 
drive) and then save the program — for example as NEWADDR.BAS. You may 
need this program again while you are developing the main program: if there are 
any problems while you are testing the program, you may have to delete the Index 
file and Data file and then use your NEWADDR program to create a new Keyed 
file. 


Working out the main program 


The program will simply: 


1. Open the address list file, define the record layout used in this file and allocate 
some memory for BASIC to manipulate the Keyed file in 


2. Ask the user as many times as necessary to type A, R, D or Q to Add a record 
to the data base, Read the details of the record associated with a chosen key, 
Delete a record that's no longer wanted or Quit the program 


3. Close the address list. ® 
This requires a very straightforward main program, using subroutines to: 


— Add a new record to the file (at 3000) 
— Read an existing record in the file (at 4000) 
— Delete a record that is no longer required (at 5000) 





92 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


The main program we need is: 


100 '' 
110 ' Preparatory stage 
120 § sSs=ssssSSsssSs== 
200 PRINT "This is where we set aside some memory used for 
manipulating Keyed files, open the Address file 
and define the record layout" 
300 ' 
310 ' Main program loop 
320 | = esssesssSSSs=5== 
400 INPUT "Add, Read, Delete or Quit: Type initial letter "; 
keyread$ : keyread$=UPPERS (keyread$) 
500 IF keyread$="A" THEN GOSUB 3000 ELSE IF keyread$="R" 
THEN GOSUB 4000 ELSE IF keyread$="D" THEN GOSUB 5000 
600 IF keyread$ <> "Q" GOTO 300: REM Loop until "Q" is typed 
700 ' 
710 ' Close Address file 


eG 





800 PRINT "This is where we close the Keyed file, ensuring 
that the Index file and Data file on disc are correctly 
up to date" 
900 END 
We will now fill out this program with the details of the preparatory and closing 
stages and of the subroutines. 


Preparatory stage 


The first stage of any program that uses Keyed files must do three things: 


1. Allocate some space in memory for manipulating Keyed files 


The command to use is the BUFFERS command and the space you allocate sets the 
limit on the amount of the index that can be held in memory at any one time. 


Space is available in ‘buffers' of 128 bytes and the number of units you specify 
depends on whether you are more worried about the speed at which the program 
works or the amount of space available to your program as a whole. The more 
buffers you specify the faster Keyed files can be searched, but the space available 
to your program is reduced by 128 bytes per buffer. Six is usually a good number 
to start with, giving you the statement: 

210 BUFFERS 6 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 93 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


2. Open the Keyed file you want to work with 
The command we want here is: 


OPEN "“K", #file%, “ADDRESS.DAT", "“ADDRESS.KEY", 

lock%, recleng% 
This opens the existing Keyed file pair ADDRESS.DAT (the Data file) and 
ADDRESS.KEY (the Index file). 


The command contains some special elements: 
"K" which means that this is the Keyed version of the OPEN command 


file% which is the number that will be used to refer to this Keyed file 
wherever it is used in this program 


recleng% which holds the length of a name and address record 
lock% which may be set to 0, 1 or 2, corresponding to the different types of 
lock that can be applied to a file: the lock we recommend you to use on 


single-user systems is 2 which gives you exclusive use of the file. (See Part 
II, Section 9.2 for details of the locks to use on multi-user systems.) 


In our example, keyfile% will be 1 and recleng% will be 122 (20 for the 
name, five lots of 20 for the address and an extra 2 bytes that you always have to 
add to the total). These values stay the same throughout the program so you could 
write them directly into the OPEN command, but this would make the program 
harder to read and harder to update. It is better to have four statements: 

220 fileS=1: recleng%=122: lockt= 2 

230 OPEN "K", #file%, “ADDRESS.DAT", "“ADDRESS.KEY", 


lock%, recleng% 
3. Define how the records in this file are laid out 


Before you can either read records or add new records to the data file, you have to 
use a command to define the layout of the records in the data file and assign string 
variables to each of these fields. This is called defining the record's ‘Fields’. The 
Data file is a Random access file and so the command used to set up the fields in it 
is a FIELD command, exactly as you use a FIELD command to define the layout of 
records in a Random access file (see Chapter 6). 


This FIELD command must always be after the OPEN command but before the 
loop which reads and writes the records. 


94 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 





For the address file we want the first 20 bytes for the name and then five lots of 20 
bytes for the address, giving us the FIELD statement: 


240 FIELD #file%, 20 AS namefld$, 20 AS addrfld1l$, 20 AS 
addrf1d2$, 20 AS addrfld3$, 20 AS addrfld4$, 20 AS addrfld5$ 


Note how field variables all have individual names; they cannot be set up as 
members of an array. 


With these commands, the first part of the program has now become: 


100 '' 

110 ' Preparatory stage 

120 0 =SessssssssSss555 

130 '' 

200 PRINT "This is where we set aside some memory used for 
manipulating Keyed files, open the Address file and 
define the record layout" 

210 BUFFERS 6 

220 fileS=1: reclengs=122: lock%= 

230 OPEN "K", file%, "ADDRESS.DAT", "ADDRESS.KEY", 

lock%, recleng% 








240 FIELD #file%, 20 AS namefld$, 20 AS addrfldl$, 20 AS 
addrfld2$, 20 AS addrfld3$, 20 AS addrf1d4$, 20 AS addrf1d5$ 

300 " 

310 ' Main program loop 

320 | =seeeesessesssss= 

330 * 


Adding a record 


The subroutine that adds a record to the data base (the subroutine at 3000) has to: 
Read in the new name and address from the keyboard 


Display these so that you can check them 
Fill the fields of the record with the data, and 
Write the record onto the disc 


| 


| 


The actions of reading in a new name and address and displaying this information 
are standard data handling operations, not involving any of the special Jetsam 
commands at all. Moreover, they might well be required at a number of different 
points in the finished program, so we shall write these as separate subroutines — at 
1000 and 2000, respectively. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 95 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 





In outline, this gives us the following subroutine: 

3000 ' 

3100 ' Add a record to the data base 

3200 ' 

3300 GOSUB 1000: REM —- read in name and address 

3400 GOSUB 2000: REM - display these to check they're OK 

3500 INPUT "Is that correct? Type Y or N "; nameok$ 
nameok$=UPPERS (nameok$) 

3600 IF nameok$="N" GOTO 3300:REM loop and ask again if not OK 

3700 PRINT "This is where we fill the fields with the data" 

3800 PRINT "This is where we add the record to the data base" 

3900 RETURN 


Before we go any further, it is a good idea to write the input and display subroutines 
at 1000 and 2000. If you have got these working, you can use them to test the 
Keyed file handling. 


The input subroutine just needs to use INPUT statements to prompt you to type the 
name and then the lines of the address, and to read this information into the 
program. So the subroutine would be: 

1000 '' 

1100 ' Subroutine to read name and address 

1200 '' 

1300 INPUT "Name "; pername$ 

1400 FOR I$=1 TO 5 

1500 INPUT "Address line "; peraddr$ (I%) 

1600 NEXT I% 

1900 RETURN 


Similarly, the display subroutine just needs to use PRINT statements to display the 
name and address information on the screen: 

2000 '! 

2100 ' Subroutine to display name and address 

2200 ' 

2300 PRINT pername$ 

2400 FOR I%=1 TO 5 

2500 PRINT peraddr$ (I%) 

2600 NEXT I% 

2900 RETURN 

Note: These subroutines use an array - peraddr$ — to store the five lines of the 
address. So we must remember to put a DIM statement at the beginning of the 
program as follows: 


140 DIM peraddr$ (5) 


96 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7; Keyed access files for data bases 


Filling the record fields with the data 


The Data file is a Random access file and so we use the same techniques to fill the 
record fields with data. 


Field string variables, as we explained when describing how to use Random access 
files, aren't given a value through a simple assignment statement like addrf1d2$ 
= "address". Instead the assignment takes one of the following three forms: 
LSET field-variable=string-expression 

RSET field-variable=string-expression 

MIDS (field-variable, start, length) =string-expression 

LSET — which sets the field-variable to the string-expression, left aligned and 
padded out with spaces — is the one we shall use here. So we shall need six LSET 
commands as follows: 

3710 LSET namefld$=pername$ 

3720 LSET addrf1d1$=peraddr$ (1) 

3730 LSET addrf1d2$=peraddr$ (2) 

3740 LSET addrf1d3$=peraddr$ (3) 

3750 LSET addrf1d4$=peraddr$ (4) 

3760 LSET addrf1d5$=peraddr$ (5) 


Writing the record to disc 


Once the record has been filled, we can add it to the data base. For this, we use a 
special Jetsam instruction - ADDREC which both puts the record into the Data file 
and puts the chosen key into the Index file. 


The information we need to give ADDREC is the reference number of the Keyed 
file and the key we want to use for the entry: 

ADDREC (#file%, 2, rank%, key$) 

file? is the file number we are using in this program to identify the data file, 2 is 
(once again) the type of lock that we recommend you to use (exclusive access) and 
key$ is the name the record is to be tagged with. As the index is kept in 
alphabetical order, key$ also defines the place the key fits in the index. The other 
item in this instruction —- rank% — is the number of the index you want to add the 
key to. You are allowed to put the keys associated with the records in the data base 
into up to eight indexes (known as ranks), identified by the numbers 0...7. 


Where, as in this example case, you are only interested in keeping one index of 
these keys, it is simplest just to use rank number 0. Indeed, for most practical 
purposes, you can think of the ADDREC instruction as: 


ADDREC (#file%,2,0,keyS) 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 97 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


The key you use is up to you. The only restriction is that it is no more than 31 
characters long. In a simple address file, the obvious thing to use to tag each record 
is the name, so we will use pername$ as our key. 


ADDREC, in common with the other special Jetsam instructions, is a function 
rather than a command — that is, it produces a value as well as performing the task. 
The Jetsam instructions are set up like this because in some cases BASIC won't be 
able to execute your instruction — for example, the command that deletes keys will 
fail if the key cannot be found. The value the instruction produces — known as the 
return code — gives you a way of checking that all is well. In general, a return code 
of zero indicates success, while a non-zero return code indicates failure. (In fact, 
the precise value tells you the reason for the failure — see Part II — but it is usually 
enough just to know whether the operation succeeded or failed.) 


Thus the ADDREC statement we want is: 
3810 rc%=ADDREC (#file%,2,0,pername$) 


which we should follow with a test of whether the command was successful. To 
keep this example program simple, we will just display a message on the screen 
when the ADDREC fails — as follows: 


3820 IF rc% <> 0 THEN PRINT "ADDREC FAILED,Return Code "; rce% 


That completes the task of adding a record to the data base, making the completed 
subroutine: 


3000 '! 

3100 ' Add a record to the data base 

3200 '! 

3300 GOSUB 1000: REM - read in name and address 

3400 GOSUB 2000: REM - display these to check they're OK 

3500 INPUT "Is that correct? Type Y or N "; nameok$ 
nameok$=UPPER$S (nameok$) 

3600 IF nameok$="N" GOTO 3300:REM loop and ask again if not OK 

3700 PRINT "This is where we fill the fields with the data" 

3710 LSET namefld$=pername$ 

3720 LSET addrf1d1$=peraddr$ (1) 

3730 LSET addrf1d2$=peraddr$ (2) 

3740 LSET addrf1d3$=peraddr$ (3) 

3750 LSET addrf1d4$=peraddr$ (4) 

3760 LSET addrf1d5$=peraddr$ (5) 

3800 PRINT "Add the record to the data base" 

3810 rc%=ADDREC (#file%,2,0,pername$) 

3820 IF rc% <> 0 THEN PRINT "ADDREC FAILED,Return Code "; rce% 

3900 RETURN 





98 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


Reading a record 


Looking up a record in the data base is split into three stages: 


— looking up the key in the index, which finds the record's record number but 
doesn't actually read the record 


— getting the record from the Data file 
— extracting and displaying the information in the record 


In outline, this gives us the following for the subroutine at 4000: 
4000 ' 

4100 ' Read a record from the data base 

4200 ' 

4300 PRINT "This is where we locate the record" 
4400 PRINT "This is where we get the record" 

4500 PRINT "This is where we extract the data" 

4600 GOSUB 2000: REM - display the data 

4900 RETURN 


Looking up the Key in the Index file 


This uses another special Jetsam instruction — SEEKKEY(#file%, 2, 
rank%, key$) which searches the Index file for the key you specify. 


Again, £i1e% is the file number we are using to identify the data file, 2 is the lock 
we suggest you set (exclusive access), rank% is the number of the index that you 
put the key in, and key$ is the name you tagged the record with. In this simple 
program, we are just using one of the eight possible indexes — rank number 0 — so 
the instruction we want is SEEKKEY (#£ile%,2,0,key$). 


SEEKKEY, like ADDREC, is a function rather than a command, producing a 
return code so that you can see whether the operation was a success or a failure. 
Once again, a zero return code means success while a non-zero code indicates 
failure for some reason and the program needs to test whether the operation was 
successful. As with ADDREC, we will keep the program simple and just use the 
statements: 
4320 xrc%=SEEKKEY (file%,2,0,key$) 
4330 IF rc% <> 0 THEN PRINT "Failed to 

find ";key$, "Return Code ";rc%: RETURN 
The only thing that is missing at this point are details of the key SEEKKEY is to 
search for. This has to be typed in, so the program needs a INPUT statement to 
prompt you to do this: 
4310 INPUT "Type name to look up: "; key$ 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 99 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


Note: BASIC won't be able to find the entry you require unless you type in the key 
using exactly the same combination of capital and lower case letters as was used 
when the key was set up. Extra trailing spaces after the key name will also stop the 
key from being found. However, your program could be designed to force all the 
keys into a particular style (eg. all capitals, no extra spaces) which will overcome 
this problem. 


Getting the record from the data file 


Using SEEKKEY looks up the Index file and finds the record number for the 
record in the Data file — rather like you might look up a topic in the index of a book 
and find out the number of the page it is described on. SEEKKEY doesn't actually 
read the record. Before you can read the information, you need to Get the relevant 
record from the file, just as you have to Get records from Random access files. 


To get the record, we use the standard BASIC command GET. 


This command generally needs to be told precisely which part of the file to get, but 
we can use the simple version of the command which gets the Current record. The 
SEEKKEY command we have just used changed the Current position to the key 
and record it found in the Index. So all we need here is: 


4410 GET files 
Note: This simple form of the GET command is also available for getting 


information from Random files but then it gets the record following the current 
record, rather than the current record itself — a subtle but important difference. 


Extracting and displaying the data 


The GET command used above associates the information in the record with the 
field-variables defined in the FIELD statement at the beginning of the program. To 
use the information, you need to extract the data into standard program variables. 


Extracting the data is like filling the fields with new information, but in reverse. 
But the process is simplified because ordinary assignment statements can be used: 


4510 pername$=namefld$ 

4520 peraddr$ (1) =addrfld1$ 
4530 peraddr$ (2) =addrf1d2$ 
4540 peraddr$ (3) =addrf1d3$ 
4550 peraddr$ (4) =addrf1d4$ 
4560 peraddr$ (5) =addrf1d5$ 





100 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


To display the information, we can use the same subroutine that we used to help 
check that the information we were about to add to the Data file was correct — the 


subroutine at 2000, giving the line: 
4600 GOSUB 2000: REM - Display the record 


Thus the complete subroutine is: 


4000 ' 

4100 ' Read a record from the data base 

4200 ! 

4300 PRINT "This is where we locate the record" 
4310 INPUT "Type name to look up: "; key$ 


4320 rc%=SEEKKEY (file%,2,0,key$) 
4330 IF rce% <> O THEN PRINT "Failed to 
find ";key$, "Return Code ";rc%: RETURN 
4400 PRINT "This is where we get the record" 
4410 GET #file% 
4500 PRINT "This is where we extract the data" 
4510 pername$=namef1d$ 
4520 peraddr$ (1) =addrf1d1$ 
4530 peraddr$ (2) =addrf1d2$ 
4540 peraddr$ (3) =addrf1d3$ 
4550 peraddr$ (4) =addrf1d4$ 
4560 peraddr$ (5) =addrf1d5$ 
4600 GOSUB 2000: REM - Display the record 
4900 RETURN 


Deleting an entry 


BASIC works its way around a Keyed file by finding the key in the Index file and 
then changing its Current position in the Keyed file to the combination of key and 
record it finds. If there is no key associated with a record, BASIC will never go to 
the record: it is as if the record does not exist. So the way to delete an entry from a 
Keyed file is simply to delete all the keys associated with the record. 


Delete the key ... and the record is deleted too: 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 101 








Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 





The data in the record initially remains in the file, but the next time a record is 
added to the data base, BASIC might well use that ‘empty’ slot to put the data into. 


{| 


The subroutine that deletes an entry must: 


— identify the record to be deleted, and then 
— delete the key(s) 


The simplest way to do this is to use our ‘Read’ subroutine to retrieve the record and 
then use a special Jetsam command — DELKEY — to delete the key. 


The DELKEY command has two different forms: the simpler deletes the Current 
key (the Current position then moves to the next key and record in the index); the 
other deletes a specified key (leaving the Current position unchanged — unless, of 
course, you specified the Current key!). The effect of the ‘Read’ subroutine is to 
make the retrieved key the Current key, so we can use the simpler form of 
DELKEY: 

rc%=DELKEY (#file%, 2) 

As usual, f£ile% is the number we have associated with the Keyed file, 2 is the 
lock that we recommend and rc% is the return code produced by the Jetsam 
function to show whether the instruction was successful. However, in this case, a 
non-zero return code can mean success — up to 103. To avoid confusion in other 
parts of the program, the statement that checks whether the command was 
successful will also set all 'success' return codes to zero. 


The subroutine we will use to delete the record is therefore: 


5000 ' Delete a record from the data base 

5200 ' 

5300 GOSUB 4000: REM - look up the record to delete 

5400 IF rc%<>0 THEN RETURN: REM - exit if look-up failed 
5500 rc%=DELKEY (#file%,2): REM -— delete the current record 
5600 IF rce%>103 THEN PRINT "Record not deleted" ELSE rc%= 
5900 RETURN 


102 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7; Keyed access files for data bases 





Closing the Keyed file 


After you have finished with a Keyed file, you must close it. This does two things: 
— ensures all the changes that you have made to the files are written to disc 
— releases the record buffer and other resources for use with other files 
If the files aren't properly closed, there is a risk that the Index file and the Data file 
stored on disc are inconsistent, with the result that the data base could give you 
incorrect results in future. Rather than let this happen, BASIC won't let you use a 
Keyed file unless you closed it properly the last time. 
The command that does this is CLOSE and the statement we will use is: 


810 CLOSE #file% 


e That completes this simple address program. The complete program is 
shown below, together with the screen display from a short session of using the 


program. 

100 '' 

110 ' Preparatory stage 
120 ' seeeseseseseses== 
130 ' 


140 DIM peraddr$ (5) 
200 PRINT "This is where we set aside some memory used for 
manipulating Keyed files, open the Address file and 
define the record layout" 
210 BUFFERS 6 
220 file%=1: recleng%$=122: lock%=2 
230 OPEN "K", #file%, “ADDRESS.DAT", “ADDRESS.KEY", 
locks, recleng% 
240 FIELD #file%, 20 AS namefld$, 20 AS addrfld1$, 20 AS addrf1d2$, 
20 AS addrf1d3$, 20 AS addrfld4$, 20 AS addrf1d5$ 


300 ' 

310 ' Main program loop 

320 ' sesss=sss==s===== 

330 ' 

400 INPUT "Add, Read, Delete or Quit: Type initial letter 


(caps) "; keyread$ : keyread$=UPPERS (keyread$) 
500 IF keyread$="A" THEN GOSUB 3000 ELSE IF keyread$="R" 
THEN GOSUB 4000 ELSE IF keyread$="D" THEN GOSUB 5000 
600 IF keyread$ <> "Q" GOTO 300: REM Loop until "Q" is typed 
700 ' 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 103 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


710 
720 
130 
800 


810 

900 

1000 
1100 
1200 
1300 
1400 
1500 
1600 
1900 
2000 
2100 
2200 
2300 
2400 
2500 
2600 
2900 
3000 
3100 
3200 
3300 
3400 
3500 


3600 
3700 
3710 
3720 
3730 
3740 
3750 
3760 
3800 
3810 
3820 
3900 
4000 


104 


' Close Address file 





PRINT "This is where we close the Keyed file, ensuring 

that the Index file and Data file on disc are up to date" 
CLOSE #file% 
END 


' Subroutine to read name and address 
’ 
INPUT "Name "; pername$ 
FOR I%=1 TO 5 

INPUT "Address line "; peraddr$(I%) 
NEXT I% 
RETURN 


' Subroutine to display name and address 
PRINT pername$ 
FOR I%=1 TO 5 
PRINT peraddr$ (1%) 
NEXT I% 
RETURN 


' Add a record to the data base 

GOSUB 1000: REM - read in name and address 

GOSUB 2000: REM - display these to check they're OK 

INPUT "Is that correct? Type Y or N "; nameok$ 
nameok$=UPPERS$ (nameok$) 

IF nameok$="N" GOTO 3300: REM ask again if not OK 

PRINI "This is where we fill the fields with the data" 

LSET namefld$=pername$ 

LSET addrfld1$=peraddr$ (1) 

LSET addrf1d2$=peraddr$ (2) 

LSET addrf1d3$=peraddr$ (3) 

LSET addrf1d4$=peraddr$ (4) 

LSET addrf1d5$=peraddr$ (5) 

PRINT "This is where we add the record to the data base" 

rce%=ADDREC (#file%,2,0,pername$) 

IF rc% <> 0 THEN PRINT "ADDREC FAILED, Return Code "; rc% 

RETURN 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 





4100 ' Read a record from the data base 
4200 ' 
4300 PRINT "This is where we locate the record" 
4310 INPUT "Type name to look up: "; key$ 
4320 rc%=SEEKKEY (#file%,2,0,key$) 
4330 IF rc% <> O THEN PRINT "Failed to find ";keyS$, 
"Return Code ";rce%: RETURN 
4400 PRINT "This is where we get the record" 
4410 GET #file% 
4500 PRINT "This is where we extract the data" 
4510 pername$=namefld$ 
4520 peraddr$ (1) =addrf1d1$ 
4530 peraddr$ (2) =addrf1d2$ 
4540 peraddr$ (3) =addr£1d3$ 
4550 peraddr$ (4) =addrf1d4$ 
4560 peraddr$ (5) =addrf1d5$ 
4600 GOSUB 2000: REM - Display the record 
4900 RETURN 
5000 ' 
5100 ' Delete a record from the data base 
5300 GOSUB 4000: REM - look up the record to delete 
5400 IF rc%<>0 THEN RETURN: REM - exit if look-up failed 
5500 rc%=DELKEY (#file%,2): REM - delete the current record 
5600 IF rc%>103 THEN PRINT "Record not deleted" ELSE rc%=0 
5900 RETURN 
Note: This program contains a number of PRINT statements that simply display a 
message about the part of the program that is about to be used. Such statements are 
useful when you are developing the program as a way of checking that control is 
being transferred around the program in the way you expect — especially when 
some parts of the program exist only in outline. When the program is fully 
working, convert these statements into comments — by inserting ' at the beginning 
of each statement. 





Enhancements 


Many desirable features have been left out of this program. It doesn't allow you to 
change an entry in the data base if, for example, someone moves house. It also 
doesn't allow you to change the key that you are using for an entry, or to index 
records under a number of keys, and if you had tagged more than one entry with the 
same key (two Mr Smiths, say), it would only ever find the one that has been in the 
data base longest. 


To illustrate how to give your program these features, we will now prepare 
appropriate subroutines for each of these tasks. 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 105 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 





Adding extra keys 


Each key in the Index file is associated with just one record but each record can be 
tagged with any number of keys, either in the same index or in different indexes. 


The ADDREC instruction you use when you add the record to the data base lets 
you tag the record with one key. Further keys are added one at a time with 
ADDKEY instructions. These extra keys can be added to any one of the eight 
indexes or 'Ranks' that are available in each Index file. They don't have to be added 
to the same Rank as the original key. 


Before you can use ADDKEY to add extra keys, you need to know the record's 
record-number. If your program adds these extra keys immediately after the 
ADDREC that wrote the record, the record you want will be the Current record and 
you can use another Jetsam instruction — the FETCHREC instruction — to discover 
its record-number. When your program is going back to information that was 
stored earlier, you need to retrieve the record first (making it the Current record) 
and then use FETCHREC to tell you its record-number. (If in doubt, retrieve the 
record, because then you can check that you are picking out the right information.) 


If we were to add such a subroutine at 6000, it would be: 


6000 ' 
6010 ' Subroutine to add extra keys to one record 
6020 ' 
6100 GOSUB 4000: REM - retrieve record using existing 
subroutine, which also displays the retrieved information" 
6200 rec.no = FETCHREC (#file%): REM - remember record number 
6300 INPUT "Type the new key. If no more keys to add, 
just press RETURN "; newkey$ 
6310 IF newkey$="" THEN RETURN: REM - exit subroutine 
when no more keys to add 
6400 INPUT "Type the number of the index you want to add 
the key to (0..7) "; ranks 
6500 rc% = ADDKEY (#file%,2,xrank%,newkey$,rec.no): REM 
- add the new key in the specified index 
6510 IF rcs >= 130 THEN PRINT "ADDKEY failed. Operation 
abandoned": RETURN: REM - exit subroutine 
as ADDKEY unable to add to this record 
6520 IF rc% <> 0 THEN PRINT "Key not acceptable":REM see Pt II 
6600 GOTO 6300: REM - loop to add further keys 
6900 RETURN 


The operation of this subroutine should be clear from the comment statements. As 
usual, £i1e% is the number we are using to refer to the Keyed file and 2 is the lock 
we recommend. 


106 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7; Keyed access files for data bases 


Changing the key 


To change the key that a record has been tagged with, you have to both add a new 
key (using ADDKEY) and get rid of the old key (using DELKEY). 


The order in which you do these operations is important. You must add the new key 
before you delete the old key. If you delete the old key first and it is the only key, 
you will delete the record as well. We earlier used precisely this effect to delete 
records from the data base! 


The subroutine we need uses very much the same statements as the subroutines to 
Add an extra key and to Delete a record. In fact, you could just make your program 
call first the Add key subroutine and then the Delete one. However, this wouldn't 
be a very good solution because each subroutine would start by using the Read a 
record subroutine to search the Index for the same key. A better program would 
search for the key once and remember the details it finds. 


To keep the program simple, we will just have a subroutine that changes a key in 
the first index (rank 0): 
7000 ' 
7010 ' Subroutine to Change a key 
7020 ' 
7100 GOSUB 4000: REM - look up record to change 
7200 rec.no = FETCHREC (#file%): REM —- remember record number 
7300 INPUT "Type the new key "; newkey$ 
7400 rc% = ADDKEY (#file%,2,0,newkey$,rec.no): REM — add the 
new key in the specified index 
7500 IF rcs = 0 THEN rc% = DELKEY (#file%,2,0,key$,rec.no): IF 
rce%<=130 THEN rc% = 0 : REM - Delete old key and tidy rc% 
7600 IF rc% <> 0 THEN PRINT "Changing key value failed, 
Return code = "; rc% 
7900 RETURN 
Notice the form of the DELKEY instruction we have used here — 
DELKEY (#file%,2,0,key$,rec.no). This has more parameters than the 
DELKEY instruction we used earlier — the index we are working on (rank 0), the 
old key and the record-number the key points to. We have to specify both the key 
and the record-number as there could be two different records that are tagged with 
the same key — for example, two different Mr Browns. 


We have had to use the longer form of the DELKEY command because the key we 
want to delete is no longer the Current key because the ADDKEY command 
moved the Current key to the new key. If we had used the simpler form of 
DELKEY, we would have deleted the key we had just added! 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 107 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 





Changing an entry in the data base 


The simplest sort of change to make is to change the details of the record without 
affecting the key the record is tagged with — the kind of change involved when 
someone moves house. The subroutine that makes such a change has to: 


— retrieve the current version of the record 
— replace the information in the record fields with the new information, and 
— save the new information to disc 


In outline, the subroutine we need is: 


sooo ' 

8010 ' Change a record in the data base 

8020 ' 

8100 GOSUB 4000: REM - retrieve the relevant record*and read it 

8200 ' 

8210 ' Read in the new information and display it 

8220 ' 

8230 GOSUB 1000: REM —- read in the new information 

8240 GOSUB 2000: REM - display it to check it's OK 

8250 INPUT "Is that correct? Type Y or N "; nameok$ 
nameok$=UPPER$S (nameok$) 

8260 IF nameok$ = "N" GOTO 8230:REM loop and ask again if OK 

8300 ' 

8310 ' Set up the new record fields 


8400 ' 

8410 ' Save the new information to disc 
8420 ' * 

8900 RETURN 


The process of setting up the new record fields uses the same commands as we used 
when adding a completely new record to the data base: 

8330 LSET namefld$=pername$ 

8340 LSET addrfldl$=peraddr$ (1) 

8350 LSET addrf1d2$=peraddr$ (2) 

8360 LSET addrf1d3$=peraddr$ (3) 

8370 LSET addrf1ld4$=peraddr$ (4) 

8380 LSET addrf1d5$=peraddr$ (5) 


As we are just changing information stored in the record, we can use a PUT 
command to write the new information to disc. Like GET, this command usually 
needs to be told whereabouts on the disc the information has to be written, but as 
the record in question is the Current record we can use the simple form: 

8430 PUT #filesd 


108 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


Note: This simple form of the PUT command is also available for writing 
information in Random files but then it writes the record following the current 
record, rather than the current record itself — a subtle but important difference. 


The complete subroutine is therefore 


sooo '' 

8010 ' Change a record in the data base 

8020 ' 

8100 GOSUB 4000: REM - retrieve the relevant record and read it 

8200 ' 

8210 ' Read in the new information and display it 

8220 ' 

8230 GOSUB 1000: REM —- read in the new information 

8240 GOSUB 2000: REM - display it to check it's OK 

8250 INPUT "Is that correct? Type Y or N "; nameok$ 
nameok$=UPPERS (nameok$) 

8260 IF nameok$ = "N" GOTO 8230:REM loop and ask again if OK 

8300 ' 

8310 ' Set up the new record fields 

8320 ' 

8330 LSET namefld$=pername$ 

8340 LSET addrf1d1$=peraddr$ (1) 

8350 LSET addrf1d2$=peraddr$ (2) 

8360 LSET addrf1d3$=peraddr$ (3) 

8370 LSET addrf1d4$=peraddr$ (4) 

8380 LSET addrf1d5$=peraddr$ (5) 

8400 ' 

8410 ' Save the new information to disc 

8420 ' 

8430 PUT #files% 

8900 RETURN 


Changing and re-indexing an entry 


The more difficult case of changing a record is when this changes the key as well 
as the information. For example, you might want to update your name and address 
list when someone gets married, changing both name (the key) and address. In such 
cases, there are two approaches: 

1 Change the data in the record, then re-index 


2 Delete both the record and the key, and add the new details from scratch 


The second of these two approaches is simpler and easier to write. We could 
program it as follows: 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 109 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 





9000 ' Change the record and key 

9010 ! 

9100 GOSUB 5000: REM —- look up and delete old record 
9110 IF rc%<>0 THEN RETURN: REM - exit if look up fails 
9200 GOSUB 3000: REM - add new information 

9900 RETURN 


But this approach won't always work. One case when it fails is when there is more 
than one key indexing a particular record. 


A subroutine that takes Approach 1 would cope with multiple keys and could be 
combined with the subroutine we prepared above that changed just the record in the 
disc. You just need to remember the old key and see whether it changes when you 
acquire the new information. If it does, then you need to change the key as well — 
by using the subroutine we have prepared at 7000 to change the key (ideally 
modified so that the program doesn't ask for the new key twice!) 


In outline, the combined subroutine would be: 


8010 ' Change a record in the data base 

8020 ' 

8100 GOSUB 4000: REM retrieve the relevant record and read it 

8110 old.name$=key$:REM - remember the old name (current key) 

8200 ' 

8210 ' Read in the new information and display it 

8220 ! 

8230 GOSUB 1000: REM - read in the new information 

8240 GOSUB 2000: REM - display it to check it's OK 

8250 INPUT "Is that correct? Type Y or N "; nameok$ 
nameok$=UPPER$S (nameok$) 

8260 IF nameok$ = "N" GOTO 8230:REM loop and ask again if OK 

8300 ' 

8310 ' Set up the new record fields 

8400 '! 

8410 ' Save the new information to disc 

8500 ' 

8510 ' Test whether name has changed; if so change key 

8520 ' 

8530 IF old.name$<>pernameS THEN GOSUB 7000:REM change key 

8900 RETURN 


The point to note about this subroutine is the way it updates the information in the 
record before it changes the key. Whenever you want to change both the 
information in the record and any keys, you must be careful to finish changing the 
information before you start changing the keys. You mustn't have any ADDKEY or 
DELKEY instructions between the GET statement that reads the old information in 
the file and the PUT statement that overwrites the record with the new information. 


110 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


Selecting among identical keys 


The simple Read a record subroutine at 4000 asks for a key and gives you the 
details of the entry it finds. It doesn't give you the chance to pick out other entries 
that have been tagged with the same key. 


When you tag a new record with the same key as an existing record, the new key is 
inserted into the Index immediately after the existing one. This means you can 
gradually build up an Index containing ‘sets’ of identical keys, with the oldest entry 
with this key at the top of the set and the newest at the bottom. For example, in an 
address list that included a number of Mr Smiths and a number of Mr Browns, you 
would have a set all with the key 'Mr Smith’ and a set with the key ‘Mr Brown’. 











Mr Brown 9=[——————_ Record! 














Mr Brown Record 2 
















Miss Jones Record 3 














Mr Smith Record 4 











Mr Smith Record 5 




















The problem with the simple Read routine is that it can only ever pick out the entry 
at the top of the set with this key. A better subroutine would allow you to reject this 
record and look at the next one in the index, so that you could gradually work 
through all the Mr Smiths until you find the one you want. 


The Jetsam command needed here is SEEKNEXT. Once SEEKKEY has been used 
to find the first entry in the set, SEEKNEXT can be used to move to the next entry 
in the Index — which will either have the same key or the next key in the 
alphabetical list. (BASIC also has instructions to move to the previous entry in the 
Index — SEEKPREV — and to move to the next entry with a different key - 
SEEKSET.) 


The modified subroutine should ask whether the record that is displayed is the one 
they wanted and, if it isn't, whether the user wants to continue searching with the 
same key or with a different key. If the search is to continue with the different key, 
the program just loops back to beginning of the subroutine — to start all over again. 
But if the search is to continue with the same key, the program uses SEEKNEXT to 
move the Current position to the next entry in the Index and then loops back to the 
part of the subroutine that Gets and displays the Current record. 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 111 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 





The subroutine then becomes: 


4000 ' 
4100 ' Read a record from the data base 
4200 ! 
4300 PRINT "This is where we locate the record" 
4310 INPUT "Type name to look up: "; key$ 
4320 rc%=SEEKKEY (#file%,2,0,key$) 
4330 IF rc% <> 0 THEN PRINT "Failed to find ";key$, 
"Return Code ";rce%: RETURN 
4400 ' This is where we get the record 
4410 GET #file% 
4500 ' This is where we extract the data 
4510 pernameS=namef1ld$ 
4520 peraddr$ (1) =addrf1d1$ 
4530 peraddr$ (2) =addrf£1d2$ 
4540 peraddr$ (3) =addr£1d3$ 
4550 peraddr$ (4) =addrf1d4$ 
4560 peraddr$ (5) =addrf1d5$ 
4600 GOSUB 2000: REM - Display the record 
4700 INPUT "Is this the right name and address? Y or N "; 
nameok$ : nameokS=UPPERS (nameok$) 
4710 IF nameok$="Y" THEN RETURN: REM — exit subroutine if 
right record found 
4800 ' Determine how to continue search 
4810 INPUT "Continue search with this name as the key or Try 
new key. Type C or T (or any other letter for 
neither)"; cont$ : cont$=UPPERS (cont$) 
4820 IF cont$="T" GOTO 4300: REM - start again with a new key 
4830 IF cont$="C" THEN rce%=SEEKNEXT (file%,2): IF rc% = 0 GOTO 4400 
ELSE PRINT "SEEKNEXT failed. No more entries 
for this name": GOTO 4800 
4900 RETURN 


As with the other Jetsam commands, SEEKNEXT produces a Return code so that 
you can see whether the command was successful. In this case, Return codes below 
103 are all successes but the program only tests for a Return code of 0 because this 
tells you that the entry that has been found has the same key. 


Example 


The Task: The task is to provide a ‘phone book' rather like the one we used in 
Chapter 6 to illustrate the use of sequential files, but with the following extra 
features: 


112 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


— up to 1000 entries 
— one or more phone numbers for each client 


— production of phone lists in alphabetical order of name (name, phone 
number) 


— production of phone lists by client type (name, phone number) 
There are three client types —'A’, 'B' and 'C’. 


If you want to test your understanding of the facilities described so far, 
attempt to design and write the program now, without reading any further. 


The design As the number of entries is large, the whole file cannot be read into an 
array in memory. The need to be able to access the phone book in two different 
ways (by name and by client type) indicates that a keyed file will be better than a 
random access file. 


Part of the design is deciding the way that the information will be stored and keyed. 
The information to be stored is : 

— Name 

— Phone number 

— Client type 


The ways in which information will be requested are: 
— by name 
— by client type 


You will need a different key for each way that information will be requested, so 
two ranks will be needed — one for names, one for client types. Is there any need to 
store the information in the data file too? This depends on whether this information 
will ever be needed when another key has been used to access the record and 
whether there is room in a key for the full data. In this example, the information 
will be stored as keys and in the data file. 


To make the program somewhat easier to use, keys will be restricted to the first six 
characters of the name, so the user need only know the first part of the client name 
to find a number. 


The program will consist of the following major stages: 
— set up variables and screen 
— open or create phone book file 
— ask for and carry out instructions (search by name, add an entry, finish) 
— close file and tidy up 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 113 





Chapter 7: Keyed access files for data bases 


The following description presents one way of translating these stages into a 
program. Many of these steps have already been described previously. It is left as 
an exercise for the reader to translate this text into a program. 


e Prepare variables and screen. 

e If data and index files are present, open the keyed file. 

e If date and index files are not present ask whether to change disc or create a 
new file and do so. 

e Display options, — Search, Add, List by Name, List by Client type, Finish. 

e Get and obey user options, as follows: 


Search: — obtain name, shorten it to key length, case-convert 
and use as key 


— SEEKKEY in names rank with this key 

— If not found, say so and ask for another name 
— If found, read record and show it 

— Ask if want to look for another 

— If yes, SEEKNEXT 


— If found in same set, read record, show it and ask 
another? 


— Ifnot found, say so and ask for another name 
— Ifno, return 


Add: — obtain name, phone number, client type 


— shorten name to key length, case-convert and use as 
key 


— ADDREC with name key to names rank 
— ADDKEY client type to client types rank 
— retum 


List by Name: — SEEKRANK names rank 
— read record and print it 
— SEEKNEXT 
— if same rank, print it and repeat 
— if different rank, return 
List by Client type: - ask client type 
— SEEKKEY with client type name specified 
— read record and print it 
— SEEKNEXT if same key, print it and repeat 
— if different key set rank, return 


‘Finish: — close file 





114 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 8 





Machine level operations 


Computer magazines and other such publications often print details of ‘Machine 
code programs’ and ‘Patches’ that you can make in order to give your computer 
system special facilities. For example, you may see a short machine code program 
that someone has written that will let you ‘read’ the date and time recorded by the 
clock built into your computer, or you might see details of a Patch that will let you 
modify the characters displayed on the screen. 


The design of machine code programs and patches requires a lot of detailed 
technical knowledge about your computer and about the software you are using on 
it. Such technical detail is outside the scope of this manual: for that sort of 
information you will need to turn to a book on Machine-code or Assembler 
programming on the microprocessor in your computer. The most we give here is 
details of how the microprocessor's registers will be set on entry to the machine 
code routine and how BASIC expects these to be set when the program returns 
from this routine (given in Part Il, Appendix II). 


However, making use of published programs and patches is really very 
straightforward and this is what we describe in this chapter. 


General information 


All the software to run your computer is held in your computer's memory, as an 
array of individual codes. Each code takes up one byte of computer memory and 
has its own ‘address’ so that it can be readily found. 


When you switch on your computer and load the operating system, all the routines 
that make up the operating system are read into one area of the computer's memory 
— usually at the 'top' of the memory (high-numbered addresses). Similarly, when 
you load BASIC, the software that makes up the BASIC programming language is 
read into a separate area of memory. Any BASIC program you want to load and the 
variables this program generates are held in a third area, which BASIC 
automatically reserves as its working area. 


‘Patches’ change the codes at particular locations in the memory. This has the effect 
of changing a piece of information or how a particular routine works, for example 





Mallard BASIC: Introduction 115 





Chapter 8: Machine level operations 


causing the program to ‘jump’ to a particular routine. The published machine code 
programs usually contain extra routines that you might want to make use of. 


Applying a patch or making an machine code program available both involve 
writing new codes at particular locations in memory. In the case of a patch, these 
locations are predefined by the information that you want to change. In the case of 
a machine code program, you will probably write the new codes one after another 
into an empty area of the memory. Normally the easiest place to put it is at the top 
of the area BASIC reserves as its working area (your programs rarely need to use 
all of this area). You then have to arrange that the piece of memory you have used 
is no longer treated as part of BASIC's working area. (This is in fact essential if you 
will be calling the routine from BASIC.) 


The result of any patch will appear automatically whenever the affected code is 
accessed: you don't have to do anything special to cause the patch to be used. But 
you will have to direct your computer to execute the codes of the additional routine 
and that means remembering the address of the first code because this is the entry 
point into the program. 


So to use published patches and machine-code programs, you need to be able to: 
— write new codes at specific locations anywhere in its memory; 
— divide off a section of memory from BASIC's working area; and 
— direct the program to the start of an extra routine 


Commands that do each of these actions are available within BASIC. 


Applying a Patch 


The BASIC command used to patch bytes in memory is the POKE command, 
POKE address, new-code. This writes the new code at the address given in the 
command, replacing whatever code was there before. So you just need a separate 
POKE command for each byte you want to change. 


The address needed by the POKE is the location of the byte: this can be any integer 
between 0 and 65535. The new code is also expressed as an integer, and as the code 
occupies one byte, this can take any value between 0 and 255. 


The addresses and the new codes form the details of the patch; they will probably 
be written either as decimal numbers or as hexadecimal numbers. Either form is 
equally acceptable in the POKE command. You just have to copy these details into 
POKE commands — indeed, they may even be already presented as POKE 
commands. These POKE commands can then either form a short BASIC 'Set-up' 
program or be included in another BASIC program. 


116 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 8: Machine level operations 





The following short program illustrates such a short 'Set-up' program. This is in 
fact the preparation program that users of Amstrad PCW computers need to run 
before using the routines of GSX, the Graphics Extension to CP/M. It sets the 
‘jump’ to GSX. 

100 GSX%=&H30 

110 POKE GSX%+0, &H50 'LD D,B 

120 POKE GSX%+1, &H59 'LD E,C 

130 POKE GSX%+2, &HE .'LD C, 115 

140 POKE GSX%+3, 115 

150 POKE GSX3+4, &HC3 'JP &HOO0S 

160 POKE GSX%+5, &H5 

170 POKE GSX%+6, &HO 


Loading a machine code program 


Loading a machine code program is very like applying a patch, but with a few extra 
steps that reserve the area of memory for it. The stages involved are therefore: 


— work out how much memory is required and divide this area from the 
memory reserved by BASIC 
— load in the codes of the routine 


Allocating the memory 


The amount of memory required for the routine is defined by the number of codes 
in the routine. For example the following routine (which will fetch the time when 
you are running BASIC under a DOS operating system) needs 29 bytes to store it: 
&HB4 &H2C &HCD &H21 &H8B &HEC &H8B &HSE 

&HO8 &H8A &HC5 &H98 &H89 &HO7 &H8B &HSE 

&HO6 &H8A &HC1 &H89 &HO7 &H8B &HSE &HO4 

&H8A &HC6 &H89 &HO7 &HCB 


This memory then needs to be taken off the top of BASIC's working area. To do 
this, you use two more of BASIC's commands and functions — the HIMEM 
function to tell you the current address of the top byte in this area of memory, and 
the MEMORY command to move the top of the area to another address. In fact, 
you will typically put these together into the one instruction MEMORY HIMEM- 
bytes; so for example, to divide off a section of memory for the time routine given 
above, you would use: 


MEMORY HIMEM~-29 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 117 





Chapter 8: Machine level operations 


As the whole point of loading an external routine is to use it, the area used to store 
an external routine isn't re-absorbed into BASIC's working area at the end of the 
program. However, this means that any program that carves off a section of 
memory from the working area should only be run once per session — or, if it does 
need to be run again, the corresponding MEMORY HIMEM+bytes command should 
be used first. Otherwise, the working area will be gradually whittled away because 
the HIMEM isn't reset to its original value until you load BASIC again. 


Note: When you have more than one external routine or function you want to use, 
you need to divide off an area from BASIC's working area for each routine. This 
can be done either in one program or in a number of different programs — for 
example, one program for each routine. Each of these programs would have its own 
MEMORY instruction. Of course, the order in which you execute these programs 
will affect where each routine is actually stored in memory and so it is a good idea 
to keep careful track of this. 


Loading the routine 


The process of loading the routine simply involves executing a series of POKE 
commands, which write the individual codes of the routine into memory — starting 
at the byte immediately above the new HIMEM. 


Because the routine is to be inserted into consecutive bytes, these POKE 
commands can readily be handled by a FOR...NEXT loop. For example, the 
following could be used to read the time routine from a number of DATA 
statements: 

100 FOR i = 1 TO 29 

110 READ 3 

120 POKE HIMEM+i, j 

130 NEXT 

150 DATA &HB4, &H2C, &HCD, &H21, &H8B, &HEC, &H8B, &H5E 

160 DATA &HO8, &H8A, &HC5, &H98, &H89, &HO7, &H8B, &H5E 

170 DATA &HO6, &H8A, &HCl, &H89, &HO7, &H8B, &H5E, &HO4 

180 DATA &H8A, &HC6, &H89, &HO7, &HCB 


As well as listing the codes, the designer will normally give the total sum of the 
codes because this provides a simple check of whether you have typed all the codes 
into your program correctly. This total is known as the checksum. 





118 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 8: Machine level operations 





The checksum for the time routine is 3343. You could put this into your routine as 
follows: 

90 jsum=0 

100 FOR i = 1 TO 29 

110 READ j : Jjsum=jsumt+j 

120 POKE HIMEM+i, 3 

130 NEXT 

140 IF jsum<>3343 THEN PRINT "Error in DATA statements" : STOP 
150 DATA &HB4, &H2C, &HCD, &H21, &H8B, &HEC, &H8B, &H5E 

160 DATA &HO8, &H8A, &HC5, &H98, &H89, &HO7, &H8B, &HSE 

170 DATA &HO6, &H8A, &HC1l, &H89, &HO7, &H8B, &H5E, &HO4 

180 DATA &H8A, &HC6, &H89, &HO7, &HCB 


Using a machine code program 


The way you use a machine code program that you've loaded into memory depends 
on whether it forms a routine (a package of instructions) or a function (a packaged 
expression). 


Using an external routine 


To use an external routine, you CALL it, giving the address of the entry point to the 
routine and the names of any variables you need to pass between the routine and the 
rest of your program. 


The entry point to the routine is often the address of its first byte, ie. HIMEM+1. To 
pass this address to the CALL command, you first record this value as a variable 
and then use this variable in the CALL instruction. For example, you might record 
the entry point to the time routine as get .t ime=HIMEM+1. 


The variables you pass are defined by the routine itself. For example, the time 
routine requires three integer variables, into which it will put the hour, the minute 
and the second. These variables can then be used in the rest of your program: for 
example, you might decide simply to print them out as follows: 

200 get.time=HIMEM+1 

210 CALL get.time (hour%,min%, secs%) 

220 PRINT "Time is now "; USING "##:##:##"; hour%S, min%, secs% 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 119 





Chapter 8: Machine level operations 


Using an external function 


To use an external function, you first have to define it but then you can use it just 
like any other function. 


The process of defining it associates the function with one of the 10 names reserved 
for external functions, USRO...USR9. The command used to do this is DEF USR, 
and again you need to give the entry point to the routine (the address of the first 
byte). 


Suppose the machine code program you had just poked into memory formed an 
external function. Then the following instructions could be used to define it as the 
external function USRO: 

200 address=HIMEM+1 

210 DEF USRO=address 


To use this function, you might then have some instruction like: 
220 result=USRO (value) 
where result is the result of the function USRO on value. 


Examples 


The following are examples of BASIC programs which use the techniques 
described in this chapter. You won't necessarily be able to use these specific 
programs on your computer — the Date and Time programs, for example, can only 
be used on a computer running MS-DOS, PC-DOS or DOS Plus. Their role is more 
to provide useful models of the kind of program you might write in order to make 
use of other external programs. 


Of course, if you are using the appropriate computer and operating system, you 
might wish to make use of these programs directly. 


Example 1: Getting the date and time from DOS 


The following programs show how it is possible to fetch the current date and time 
from a Mallard BASIC program running under MS-DOS, PC-DOS or DOS Plus. 


The first part of each program sets up a machine code routine to call the operating 
system, asking for details of the date or the time as appropriate: the second part of 
the program shows the way in which the machine-code routine should be used. The 
hexadecimal numbers in the DATA statements are the machine code of the routines 
themselves. 


120 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 8: Machine level operations 


The machine code routines are stored in some of the memory which was initially 
allocated to BASIC (reserved by the MEMORY HIMEM—bytes statements). 


If you are running BASIC under MS-DOS, PC-DOS or DOS Plus, you can use 
these programs by just typing them in and running them. You can use upper or 
lower case letters and you don't have to type the REM statements if you cannot be 
bothered, but almost any other difference is likely to be significant. In particular, 
the DATA statements must be typed exactly as shown: otherwise the machine 
may lock up as you try to run the program. Indeed, it is wise to save each program 
before running it because otherwise you will have to type it in again if the machine 
does lock up. 


The programs are designed to be run just once per session. If you need to run them 
again, remember to return the area of memory reserved for the machine code to 
BASIC first, otherwise the memory will be gradually whittled away. 


The programs simply use the routines once and print the results. Clearly there are 
many more useful things that you might do, for example with extra CALLs to the 
machine code routine. If you wish, you can use the two routines together in the 
same program. Of course, CALLs must be in exactly the form given, with four 
DATE or three TIME parameters — all integers. 


100 REM 

110 REM Fetching the time 

120 REM 

130 REM Lines 210...290 Set up the machine code and 
140 REM should only be executed once 
150 REM Lines 310...320 Give an example of use 


160 REM NB: You must give all the parameters in the 

170 REM order given even if you will only use some of 

180 REM them. You can change their names if you wish but 

190 REM they must be integer variables 

200 REM 

210 MEMORY HIMEM-29 

220 Jjsum=0 

230 FORi=1 TO 29 :READ j : jsum=jsumtj :POKE HIMEM+i,j : NEXT 
240 IF jsum<>3343 THEN PRINT "Error in DATA statements" : STOP 
250 get.time = HIMEM+1 

260 DATA &HB4, &H2C, &HCD, &H21, &H8B, &HEC, &H8B, &H5E 

270 DATA &HO8, &H8A, &HC5, &H98, &H89, &HO7, &H8B, &H5E 

280 DATA &HO6, &H8A, &HCl, &H89, &HO7, &H8B, &HSE, &H04 

290 DATA &H8A, &HC6, &H89, &HO7, &HCB 

300 REM 

310 CALL get.time(hour%, min%, secs%) 

320 PRINT USING "& ##:##:##"; "Time is now ";hour%,min%, secs% 
330 END 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 121 





Chapter 8: Machine level operations 





100 REM 

110 REM Fetching the date 

120 REM 

130 REM Lines 210...300 Set up the machine code and 
140 REM should only be executed once 
150 REM Lines 320...410 Give an example of use 


160 REM NB: You must give all the parameters in the 
170 REM order given even if you will only use some of 
180 REM them. You can change their names if you wish but 
190 REM they must be integer variables 
200 REM 
210 MEMORY HIMEM-33 
220 jsum=0 
230 FOR i=1 TO 33 :READ j : jsum=jsumtj} :POKE HIMEM+ti, Jj :NEXT 
240 IF jsum <> 3554 THEN PRINT "Error in DATA statements":STOP 
250 get.date=HIMEM+1 
260 DATA &HB4, &H2A, &HCD, &H21, &H8B, &HEC, &H8B, &H5E 
270 DATA &HOA, &H98, &H89, &HO7, &H8B, &HSE, &HO8, &H8A 
280 DATA &HC2, &H98, &H89, &HO7, &H8B, &H5SE, &HO6, &H8A 
290 DATA &HC6, &H89, &HO7, &H8B, &H5E, &HO04, &H89, &HOF 
300 DATA &HCB 
310 REM 
320 wday$ (0)="Sunday" 
330 wday$ (1)="Monday" 
340 wday$ (2) ="Tuesday" 
350 wday$ (3) ="Wednesday" 
360 wday$ (4) ="Thursday" 
370 wday$ (5)="Friday" 
380 wday$ (6) ="Saturday" 
390 REM 
400 CALL get .date (wday%, day%,month%, year%) 
410 PRINT USING "& & ##/##/#HH#H"; "Today is "; 
wday$ (wday%), day%, month%, year% 
420 END 


Example 2: Using GSX routines 


GSX is the Graphics Extension to CP/M and GSX routines can be used to generate 
a wide range of graphics effects, though not all of these are available on all 
computers that run CP/M with the Graphics extension. Details of these routines and 
how they are called are outside the scope of this user guide: they are given in 
Digital Research's GSX manual. 


GSX routines are available on a number of different computer systems. The 
instructions given here are the ones for use on the Amstrad PCW machines. 


122 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


Chapter 8: Machine level operations 


Essential preparation 


To use GSX routines from BASIC, you first need to produce a copy of BASIC with 
GSX< installed on it and to set up the ASSIGN.SYS file so that it reflects the device 
drivers that you will actually be using. 


To do this, you should first create a disc with copies of the following files on it: 
e BASIC.COM (the file holding Mallard BASIC on Amstrad PCW system 
discs) 
GENGRAF.COM 
GSX.SYS 
ASSIGN.SYS 
and the relevant device drivers (with names like DDSCREEN.PRL) 
You should rename BASIC.COM to GSXBASIC.COM, and then attach GSX to 
this copy by using the command: 
GENGRAF GSXBASIC.COM 
GENGRAF.COM can then be removed from the disc. 
Finally, modify the ASSIGN.SYS file so that it reflects the actual devices to be 
used. (Your computer's CP/M guide should explain how to do this.) It is wise to 


remove from the ASSIGN.SYS any devices which you do not intend to use. Note: 
All the device drivers used by ASSIGN.SYS must be present on your disc. 


Running BASIC and GSX together 


To use GSX from BASIC, you have to load the version of BASIC to which GSX 
has been attached and then set the jump to GSX. 


The version of BASIC you require is the stored as GSXBASIC.COM, so to run it 
you just have to insert the correct disc and type the command: GSXBASIC 





To set the jump, you need to run the the following program: 


100 GSX%=&H30 

110 POKE GSX%+0, &H50 'LD D,B 
120 POKE GSX%+1, &H59 'LD E,C 
130 POKE GSX%+2, &HE ‘LD C, 115 
140 POKE GSX%+3, 115 

150 POKE GSX%+4, &HC3 ‘JP &HO005 
160 POKE GSX%+5, &H5 

170 POKE GSX%+6, &HO 


(We suggest saving this program as GSXPREP, as you will need it each time you 
run GSXBASIC.) 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 123 


Chapter 8: Machine level operations 


The program 


A BASIC program that uses GSX has to contain the following, at some point 
before the first call of GSX: 


DIM contrl1% (6), ptsin% (128) ,ptsout% (12) , intin% (128), 
intout% (45) :gsx%=&H30 


(The arrays given here use the same names as those described in the GSX 
Programmer's Guide. Other names can be used but they must be integer arrays. 
Note that the parameter block (PB) is not explicitly declared.) 


To invoke a GSX function, the program has to set suitable values into the contrl% 
array and put suitable parameters into the ptsin% and intin% arrays. GSX is then 
called by: 


CALL gsx%(gsx%,gsx%, contr1% (1) ,intin% (1) ,ptsin% (1), 
intout%3 (1), ptsout%(1)) 


The program given here will draw a filled area on PCW9000 series machines, but 
on PCW8000 series machines this area won't be filled unless the enhanced versions 
of the screen drivers are being used. (Locomotive Systems can supply the enhanced 
drivers on a 3" disc for PCW owners (together with example programs). The 
enhanced drivers are also supplied with copies of Digital Research's GSX 
programs DR Draw and DR Graph.) 


100 GOSUB 60000 ' Set up for GSX Calls 
110 PRINT "Number of points in shape (between 3 
and 32)"; : INPUT n 
120 IF n<3 OR n>32 THEN PRINT "Must be between 3 and 32 
(inclusive) .":GOTO 110 
130 GOSUB 60100 ' Open workstation 
140 contr1%(1)=23 : intin%(1)=2+RND : GOSUB 61100 ' set 
fill interior style 
150 contr1%(1)=24 : intin%(1)=1+5*RND : 
GOSUB 61100 ' set fill style index 
160 FOR i=l TO n : ptsin%(2*i-1)=32000*RND : 
ptsin% (2*i1)=32000*RND : NEXT 
170 contr1%(1)=9 : contrl%(2)=n : contrl%(4)=0 : GOSUB 61000 
180 PRINT "Again (Y/N) "+CHRS (27)+"e"; 
190 r$=UPPER$ (INKEYS$) : IF rS$<>"N" AND r$<>"Y" THEN 190 
200 GOSUB 60200 ' Close workstation 
210 IF r$="Y" THEN 110 
220 PRINT "Finished" 
230 END 





124 Mallard BASIC: Introduction 


60000 
60010 
60020 
60030 
60040 


60050 
60100 
60110 
60120 
60130 
60140 
60150 
60160 
60170 


60180 
60200 
60210 
60220 
60230 
61000 
61010 
61020 
61030 


61040 
61100 
61110 
61120 
61130 


Chapter 8: Machine level operations 





' 

' Define arrays and address of "jump" to GSX 

’ 

gsx%=&H30 

DIM contrl1% (6),ptsin% (128) , ptsout% (12) , intin% (128), 


intout% (45) 


RETURN 
' Open Workstation: Device = 1 
contrl%(1)=1 : contrl%(2)=0 : contr1%(4)=10 


FOR i=1 TO 10 : intin%(i)=1 : NEXT 

GOSUB 61000 

contrl1%$(1)=14 : contrl%(2)=0 : contr1%(4)=4 

intin%(1)=1 : intin%(2)=1000 : intin%(3)=1000 
intin% (4) =1000 





GOTO 61000 ' Set Colour Index 1 = White 


' Close Workstation 


contrl1%(1)=2 : contrl%(2)=0 : contrl%(4)=0 : GOTO 61000 


' Actual call of GSX 


CALL gsx% (gsx%, gsx%, contr1% (1) , intin% (1) ,ptsin% (1), 
intout% (1), ptsout%(1)) 


RETURN 
' Call of GSX with one INTIN parameter only 
contrl1%(2)=0 : contrl%(4)=1 : GOTO 61000 


Mallard BASIC: Introduction 125 





126 Mallard BASIC; Introduction 


Part II 
REFERENCE 





Mallard BASIC 


CONTENTS 


2. 


Zu 
yao 
2.3 
2.4 
ans 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
ao 
2,10 
ail 
2.12 
2.13 


3. 


3.1 
3.2 
ae 
3.4 


4.1 
4.2 


Introduction 
Metalanguage 


The Elements of BASIC 


Character Set 

White Space 

Names 

Numbers 

String Constants 

Data Types 

Variables 

Arrays 

Type Compatability and Conversion 
Unsigned Integer 

Expressions 

Functions 

Decimal Fractions and Binary Floating Point 


Direct and Program Mode 


Direct Mode 

Program Mode 

Suspending BASIC 

Run Only — Special Direct Mode 


The Line Editor and Simple Line Input 


Simple Line Input 
The Screen Line Editor 


Mallard BASIC; Reference 


127 
128 


129 


129 
129 
129 
130 
131 
131 
132 
133 
134 
hes) 
135 
133 
140 


141 


141 
142 
142 
142 


145 


146 
147 





Sul 
be 
3.3 
5.4 
ad 
5.6 
Sud 
5.8 
38 
5.10 
311 
3.12 
em i, 
5.14 
a 
5.16 


6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 


del 
Tia 
ie 


Overview of Commands and Functions 


Creation of Programs 
Loading and Running of Programs 
Program Termination 
Miscellaneous 

Control Structures 
Variables 

Console I/O 

Line Printer Output 

Files 

Constant Data 

Arithmetic Functions 
String Functions 

Type Conversion Functions 
Machine Level Operations 
Error Trapping 

Program Development 


Introduction to Printing 


Operation of a Print Statement 
Control Character Handling 
Logical Position 

Free Format Printing 

USING Formatted Printing 


Control of output devices 


Specification of control sequences 
Transmission of control sequences 
Interpretation of control sequences 


151 


151 
132 
152 
153 
153 
154 
154 
133 
155 
158 
158 
159 
159 
160 
160 
161 


163 


164 
164 
164 
165 
166 


169 


170 
170 
170 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


8. Introduction to File Handling 173 
8.1 File Names 174 
8.2 Disc and Directory Operations 174 
8.3 Opening and Closing Files and File Numbers 176 
8.4 Sequential File Handling 177 
8.5 Random File Handling 178 
9. Keyed File Handling 

and Multiuser file handling 181 
9.1 Consistency of the Data and Index Files 182 
9.2 Multiuser Systems - Record and File Locking 182 
9.3. Finding Records and Current Position 

in a Keyed File 186 
9.4 Overview of Facilities and Recommended Use 187 
9.5 General Remarks on Jetsam Commands and Functions 192 
10. The Commands and Built In Functions 195 
10.1 Definition of Common Terms 195 
10.2 Definition of Common Terms (Jetsam and Multiuser) 197 
10 3 Common terms for MSDOS2 198 
10.4 A-Z of Commands and Built in Functions 199 — 388 
Appendix I:Initialising BASIC 389 
Appendix II: Error Numbers and Messages 391 
II.1 Ordinary BASIC Errors 391 
I.2 Disc and File Related Errors 394 
II.3. Jetsam Specific Error Numbers 396 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 





Appendix IIT: External Routines 


III.1 Data Formats 

III.2 USR Functions 

WI.3 CALLed Subroutines 

Ill.4 Mallard-86 and Segment Registers 


Appendix IV: BASIC Keywords 


Appendix V: Hints on the Use of Jetsam 

and Multiuser Facilities 
V.1 Numeric Keys 
V.2 Sequential processing of Keyed Files 

in Multiuser Environment 

V.3 Sub-Keys 
V.4 Straightforward Multiuser Random File Handling 
V.5 Guard Record 


Appendix VI: Installation of BASIC 


VI.1 Screen requirements 

V1.2. Keyboard Commands for Editor 
VI.3 Install Program 

VI.4 Running Install 


Appendix VII: The Command editor 
Appendix VIII: ASCII Character Set 
Appendix IX: Trigonometrical Functions 


Appendix X: Binary Floating Point 


X.1 Brief Introduction 

X.2 Decimal Fractions & BFP 

X.3. BFP & Financial Calculations 

X.4 BFP & Scientific/Engineering Calculations 


397 


397 
398 
400 
402 


403 


405 
405 


406 
406 
407 
407 


409 


410 
410 
411 
411 


415 
421 
423 


425 


426 
429 
431 
432 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 1 
Introduction 


The BASIC interpreter is capable of executing the commands given in Chapter 10. 
Each command is identified by one or more leading keywords, and may have a 
number of parameters. In general each parameter may be an expression, involving 
constants, variables and functions. Strings and various forms of numeric data types 
are supported, as are sequential and random file handling. 


BASIC includes a general purpose keyed file manager, called Jetsam. This can 
create, access and modify keyed files. Facilities exist to provide indexed and 
sequential access by key value to data records. 


Where the operating system will support it the multiuser version of Jetsam may be 
used. This provides file and record locking facilities for ordinary sequential and 
random files as well as for Jetsam keyed files. 


Commands are presented to BASIC on lines. A line may comprise several 
commands, separated by colons, limited only by the line length. In Direct Mode 
lines are input from the console. In Program Mode lines are read from the current 
program in memory. 


In Direct Mode it is possible to add and remove lines from the program, and to 
amend existing lines. BASIC includes a line editor which allows the current line to 
be amended while it is being entered and before it is obeyed in Direct Mode. 


A ‘Run-Only’ subset of BASIC is supported, for use with program packages 
written in BASIC. There are performance advantages to using a Run Only version 
once a program is no longer under development. The Run Only versions exclude 
the following features: 


— Direct Mode, and hence Direct Mode commands such as EDIT 
— The line editor 
Control-A (Amend previous line) 
— Control-C (Break in) 
— Control-S (Suspend BASIC). 
Where a command is described as returning to Direct Mode, Run Only versions 


leave BASIC and return to the system (except in some cases where the Special 
Direct Mode is entered — see Section 3.4). 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 127 





Chapter 1: Introduction 


1.1 Metalanguage 


In order to describe commands and their parameters a simple metalanguage is used. 
The form of each command is described as it appears when entered, with any 
variable or optional parts shown by 'place-holders' which refer to a concept defined 
elsewhere. 


A concept is represented by its name written in italic (slanted) text. For example, in 
various places an expression yielding a numeric value is required: this is 
represented by: 


numeric-expression 

Anything shown in computer style typeface is required as given. For example the 
STOP command takes the form: 

STOP 

Where there is an optional part in a definition, the optional part is enclosed in 


square brackets. For example, if a numeric expression were to be optional then it 
would appear: 


[numeric-expression] 

If an optional part may be repeated (so may appear any number of times, including 
none at all) an asterisk is appended after the closing square bracket. For example, a 
string of digits, requiring at least one digit, would appear: 

digit[ digit]* 

In many places a list of objects separated by commas is used. Such lists are 
expressed in a special form, which is best illustrated by example, thus: 

list-of: expression is: expression[ , expression ]* 

or: list-of: [+] number is: [#] number[,[#] number] * 


Note that the list may be a single object. If the list contains more than one object, 
then each additional object must be preceded by a comma. 


Chapter 2 contains the definitions for the fundamental elements of BASIC. At the 
beginning of Chapter 10 a number of common concepts are defined, many in terms 
of the fundamental elements. 


128 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 2 
The Elements of BASIC 





2.1 Character Set 


BASIC assumes that the ASCII character set is in use. Character values less than 
space (value 32) are treated as non-printing, and several have special meaning to 
BASIC. 


Where a different character set is in use, the characters having special meaning may 
differ from those shown in this manual. Details are given in Appendix VIII. 


When processing command lines BASIC does not distinguish between upper and 
lower case, except in strings. 


2.2 White-Space 


Spaces, Tabs and Line Feeds (or any combination thereof) count as white-space. 
White-space is not significant in command lines, except where it has the effect of 
terminating an item or in a string. Note that a Carriage Return immediately 
following a Line Feed is also ignored. 


BASIC will perform space compression, in which all white-space is removed from 
lines when they are added to the current program. BASIC generates a space to 
separate variable names and keywords when required. Space compression reduces 
a program's store requirements. 


2.3 Names 


Variables and Keywords have names. The first character of a name must be 
alphabetic, further characters may be alphanumeric or dot. Names may be at most 
forty characters long, all of which are significant. A name is terminated by any 
character which may not be part of a name. 


Keywords may include other characters, and some are expressed as more than one 
word. 


Unlike some dialects of BASIC this dialect requires that variable names are 
separated from keywords by at least one "non-name" character. This means that 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 129 





Chapter 2: The Elements of BASIC 


white-space must sometimes be used as a separator. If the separator were not 
required it would restrict variable names to exclude any which included keywords 
as part of the name. 


2.4 Numbers 


A number may be any of the following: 


unscaled-number|[type-marker] 
scaled-number[type-marker] 
based-number 

line-number 


See Section 2.6 below for a discussion of type-markers. 


An unscaled-number may take any of the following forms: 

digits 

digits.[digits] 

[digits] digits 

where digits is one or more decimal digits. White-space is allowed in unscaled- 
numbers, and may be used at will as an aid to number input. 


A scaled-number may take either of the following forms: 


unscaled-numberE[sign] digits 
unscaled-numberD[sign] digits 


where sign is plus or minus, and digits is one or more decimal digits. White-space 
is allowed around the non-digit characters of the exponent part, but not within the 
digits portion. The value of the number is the value of the unscaled-number 
multiplied by the power of 10 given by the sign & digit, the exponent part. (Note 
that the absolute value of the exponent part may not exceed 99.) The difference 
between the E and the D form of the exponent part is described below. 


A based-number may take any of the following forms: 
&octal-digits 

&Ooctal-digits 

&Hhexadecimal-digits 


where octal-digits are digits in the range 0...7, hexadecimal-digits are digits in the 
range 0...9 and letters in the range A...F (or a...f). The based-number's decimal 
equivalent may not be greater than 65535, which is mapped to the two's 
complement Integer range -32768 to 32767. White-space is allowed around the 
non-digit characters, but not within the digits portion. 





130 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 2 : The Elements of BASIC 


A line-number takes the form: 

digits 

where digits is at least one decimal digit. Line numbers are limited to the range 
0...65534. 


numbers are terminated by any character which may not appear in a number. 


2.5 String Constants 


A string-constant is an arbitrary collection of characters enclosed in double quotes, 
or starting with double quotes and terminated by end of line — in which case any 
trailing white-space is not included in the string. Characters outside the normal 
ASCII printing range may appear in string constants, with the exception of Null 
(character value 0). 


2.6 Data Types 


BASIC handles two broad types of data, numeric and string. 


Strings may be from 0 to 255 characters long. The characters in a string are 
represented by values in the range 0...255 (ie. they are bytes). It is assumed that the 
ASCII character set is in use, but most string processing is independent of the 
values of the component characters. 


Numeric data may take one of three forms — Integer, Single Length and Double 
Length: 

Integer data is held as two byte two's complement numbers, so can take values in 
the range -32768 to +32767. In some instances the sixteen bit two's complement 
form is interpreted as an unsigned value in the range 0...65535 (see Section 2.10). 


Single Length data is held in a four byte binary floating point format, with three 
bytes of mantissa and one byte of binary exponent. The largest absolute value 
representable is approximately 1.7E+38, the smallest (other than zero) is 
approximately 2.9E-39. The three byte mantissa affords a little over seven decimal 
digits of precision. 


Double Length data is held in an eight byte binary floating point format, with 
seven bytes of mantissa and one byte of binary exponent. The largest absolute 
value that can be represented is approximately 1.7E+38, the smallest (other than 
zero) is approximately 2.9E-39. The seven byte mantissa affords a little over 
sixteen decimal digits of precision. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 131 





Chapter 2: The Elements of BASIC 


The type of a number is implied by its form: 


Based-numbers are always Integer, the unsigned value of which is mapped to its 
two's complement equivalent (unsigned values greater than 32767 map to 
unsigned-value — 65536). 


Unscaled-numbers are treated as Integer if there is no decimal point and the value 
can be represented in the Integer range. Otherwise the number is treated as Single 
Length if there are seven or fewer significant digits and Double Length if there are 
eight or more significant digits. 


Scaled-numbers are Single or Double Length, depending on the number of 
significant digits or the letter which introduces the exponent part. E implies Single 
Length, unless the unscaled part has eight or more significant digits, and is 
therefore already Double Length. D implies Double Length. 


The type of an unscaled-number or of a scaled-number may be changed from its 

implicit type by a trailing type-marker. The type markers are: 

% which forces the number to be rounded to the nearest Integer. If the value is 
beyond the range of an Integer this causes an overflow error. 

! which forces the number to Single Length format. 

# which forces the number to Double Length format. 


(Note that these are character set dependent (see Appendix VIII) and that they are 
the same as the type markers on variable names, see below.) 


Occasionally BASIC requires an integer value in the range 0...65535 held in a two 
byte Integer form. It does this by interpreting the usual two's complement Integer 
form as its unsigned equivalent — where signed values less than zero are interpreted 
as 65536+value. See Section 2.10. 


2.7 Variables 


Variables have three attributes — name, type and organisation. A variable-name 
takes the form name[type-marker]. The type of data referred to by a variable-name 
is either given by the type-marker, or is assumed to be the current default. The type- 
markers are: 


% for Integer 


! for Single Length 
# for Double Length 
$ for String 


(Note: Character set dependent — see Appendix VIII.) 





132 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 2 : The Elements of BASIC 


The default type assumed depends on the first character of the variable-name, and 
may be set dynamically by DEFINT, DEFSGL, DEFDBL and DEFSTR 
commands. The initial default for all variables is Single Length. 


Variables may be simple-variables which have a single value, or array-variables 
which are a collection of values of the same type. Arrays are described below. 


Note that the same name may be used for variables of different types and 
organisations, and that these constitute different variables. 


Variables do not need to be declared in BASIC. They are brought into being by 
their first use, with a value of zero or null string as appropriate. 


2.8 Arrays 


BASIC supports arrays of all data types. An array is a collection of data items of the 
same type, each of which is referenced by the array variable name followed by a 
suitable number of subscripts, thus: 


variable-name (subscripts) 

where subscripts is: list-of: integer-expression 

and the integer-expression yields a value in the correct range. 
(Note that square brackets may be used instead of round brackets.) 


The type of the data in the array is given by the type of the variable-name. 


An array may have any number of dimensions. Arrays may be declared explicitly 
in a DIM command, or implicitly by use. When an array is declared the number of 
dimensions and the upper bound on each is set. (In an implicit declaration the upper 
bound taken is 10.) Thereafter any reference to the array must use the same number 
of subscripts, and each one must be in range. It is not possible to change the 
dimensions of an array. 


The lower bound on all array subscripts is 0 by default, or may be set to 0 or 1 by 
the OPTION BASE command. It is not possible to change this lower bound while 
any arrays exist. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 133 





Chapter 2: The Elements of BASIC 


2.9 Type Compatibility and Conversion 


BASIC generally treats all numeric types as being compatible with each other. 
String type is only compatible with itself. 


When dealing with numbers of different types BASIC will type convert 
automatically. Where there are no other constraints numbers are "widened" to the 
"largest" type involved, so Integers are widened to Single Length, which are in turn 
widened to Double Length. Widening can never fail. 


Numbers may also be forced to a given representation. Double Length to Single 
Length is straightforward — the mantissa is rounded from seven bytes to three 
bytes: while this involves a considerable loss of precision, it seldom causes 
Overflow. Converting either floating point form to Integer requires the number to 
be rounded to an integer, which must then lie in the Integer range of -32768 to 
+32767, otherwise an Error 6 (Overflow) is generated. Converting any form to an 
Unsigned Integer is described in Section 2.10 below. 


2.9.1 Rounding 


There are several different ways in which a number in one form may be rounded to 
another, smaller, form. If a given number X in the larger form cannot be exactly 
represented in the smaller, it will be bracketed most closely by two values X1 and 
X2 (which can be exactly represented), where X1<X<X2. The common rounding 
schemes choose one of these values thus: 


e Truncation or Round Toward Zero 
The excess digits are simply discarded; positive X > X1, negative X > K2 


e Round Away from Zero 
Positive X + X2, Negative X > X1 


e Round Toward -Infinity 
X > Xl 


e Round Toward +Infinity 
X > X2 


e Round to Nearest. 
X + X1 or X2, depending on which is nearest to X 


Various schemes exist for choosing between X1 and X2 when X is exactly half 
way between the two. BASIC rounds away from zero in this case. 


Unless otherwise stated, the term "rounding" refers to Round to Nearest as defined 
above. 


134 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 2 : The Elements of BASIC 


2.10 Unsigned Integer 


Occasionally BASIC requires an integer value in the range 0...65535 held in a two 
byte Integer form — for example PEEK requires a machine memory address. 


Integer (two byte two's complement) values are interpreted as their unsigned 
equivalent — with signed values less than zero interpreted as 65536+value. 


If BASIC is given a Floating Point value when Unsigned Integer is required, it is 
first rounded to an integer value (but not yet to a two byte Integer), which must be 
in the range —32768 to 65535. This integer value is then converted to two's 
complement Integer form, mapping all values greater than 32767 to value-65536. 
The newly formed Integer is then interpreted as unsigned as described above. 
(Allowing negative values to map to Unsigned Integer is, at first sight, a little 
curious — it is done to ensure that Floating Point values behave in the same way as 
Integers.) 


2.11 Expressions 


There are four classes of expression — numeric, string, relational and logical. The 
precedence of operators is designed so that expressions work as might be expected. 
Where the order of evaluation is not forced either by the precedence rules or by 
brackets, evaluation proceeds from left to right. 


2.11.1 Numeric Expressions 


The syntax of numeric expressions is: 


numeric-expression is: numeric-item[operator numeric-expression] 
numeric-item is: [unary-operator]numeric-item 

or: numeric-constant 

or: numeric-variable 

or: numeric-function 

or: (numeric-expression) 

or: (relational-expression) 


where numeric-variable is a reference to a simple variable or an array item of any 
of the numeric types. A numeric-function is a function returning any of the numeric 


types. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 135 





Chapter 2: The Elements of BASIC 


The operators and unary-operators, in order of precedence, are: 


A 


Exponentiation Raises the value on the left to the power of the value 
on the right. Forces both values to Single Length 
before operation, and produces a Single Length result. 
(Note: The character used as the exponentiation 
operator is character set dependent; see Appendix VII) 


Unary Plus Note that both unary-operators have lower 

Unary Minus precedence than Exponentiation. 

Multiply Floating point or Integer multiplication. 

Divide Floating point division. If either value is Integer it is 


forced to Single Length before operation. 


Integer Division Forces both values to Integer. The result is truncated to 
an Integer. (Note: The character used as the operator is 
character set dependent; see Appendix VIII) 


MOD Integer Modulus Forces both values to Integer. The result is the 


+ 


remainder after Integer division. 


Addition Floating point or Integer addition. 
Subtraction Floating point or Integer subtraction. 


Note that: 


i. 
ii. 
iii. 


lv. 


vi. 


vii. 


Exponentiation binds tightest. 
Unary Plus and Unary Minus have equal precedence. 
Multiply and Divide have equal precedence. 


Integer Division and Modulus have equal precedence, and that their 
precedence is lower than standard Multiply and Divide. This implies that: 
x\y*y = x\(y*y) and x\y*y <> (x\y)*y 

Integer Modulus is defined so that: 

x MOD y = x — ((x\y)*y) 

so the sign of x MOD y is always the same as the sign of x (unless the 
result is zero). 


Addition and Subtraction have equal precedence. 


Except where the operator has particular requirements, the values on either 
side are forced to the same type by widening. 





136 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 2 ; The Elements of BASIC 


Division by zero generates an Error 11. If there is an ON ERROR GOTO set, then 
it is invoked in the usual way. If there is no ON ERROR GOTO set then: 

— the "Division by zero" error message is generated. 

— Integer division (\) by zero causes execution to cease. 

— Floating point division (/) by zero does not terminate execution, because 
the zero may be the result of underflow in a previous operation. Instead the 
largest representable number (approx. 1.7E+38) with appropriate sign is 
returned, and execution continues. 


In the event of overflow when the arguments are Integer, the values are widened to 
Single Length and the operation repeated. 


In the event of overflow when the arguments are floating point an Error 6 
("Overflow") is generated. If there is an ON ERROR GOTO set, then it is invoked 
in the usual way. If there is no ON ERROR GOTO set, the "Overflow" error 
message is generated, the largest representable number (approx. 1.7E+38) with 
appropriate sign is returned, and execution continues. 


2.11.2 String Expressions 
The syntax of string expressions is: 
string-expression is:  string-item[+string-expression] 
String-item is: string-variable 
or: string-constant 
or: string-function 
or: (string-expression) 
where string-variable is a reference to a simple variable or an array item of type 
string. A string-function is a function returning a value of type string. 


The effect of the + operator on strings is to concatenate them. A new string is 
produced which is the first string immediately followed by the second. If the 
resulting string would be longer than 255 characters, an Error 15 is generated. 


2.11.3 Relational Expressions 


Relational expressions compare two numeric values or two string values. Thus: 





relational-expression 
is: numeric-expression relation-operator numeric-expression 
or: string-expression relation-operator string-expression 
Note that relation-operators have a lower precedence than any of the operators in 
either string or numeric expressions, and a higher precedence than any logical 
operator. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 137 


Chapter 2: The Elements of BASIC 


The relation-operators are : 


< Less than 

<= =< Less than or Equal 

= Equal 

>= => Greater than or equal 
> Greater than 

<> Not equal 


Where the arguments are numeric the types are made the same by the process of 
widening described in Section 2.9.1 above. The meaning of the relation is as might 
be expected. 


Where the arguments are strings, the meaning of the relations requires some 
explanation: 
e Two strings are equal when they are the same length, and corresponding 
characters are the same. 
© One string is less than another if: 
— either they are equal up to the end of the first string and the second string 
is longer 
- or the first character which is not the same in the two strings is 
smaller in the first string (where the values representing the 
characters are being compared) 


BASIC does not support a Boolean type. Relational expressions yield an Integer 
value, —1 for True and 0 for False. Note that the IF and WHILE commands treat a 
value of 0 as False and any other value as True. 


2.11.4 Logical Expressions 


BASIC does not support a Boolean type. Logical expressions perform bit-wise 
boolean operations on Integers. Logical expressions are : 
argument[logical-operator argument] 
where argument is: NOT argument 

or: numeric-expression 

or: relational-expression 

or: (logical-expression) 
The two arguments for a logical operator are forced to Integer; Error 6 results if an 
argument will not fit into the Integer range. The operation is then performed for 
each bit of the 16 bit two's complement representation of the Integer. 


138 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 2: The Elements of BASIC 





The NOT unary operator inverts each bit in the argument (0 becomes 1, and vice 
versa). 


The dyadic operators, in order of precedence, and their effect on each bit are: 
AND Result is 0 unless both argument bits are 1 


OR Result is 1 unless both argument bits are 0 

XOR Result is 1 unless both argument bits are the same 

EQV Result is 0 unless both argument bits are the same 

IMP Result is 1 unless the right argument bit is 1 and the left 0 


The result of a relational expression is either —1 or 0. The representation for —1 is all 
bits of the Integer = 1; for 0 all bits of the Integer are 0. The result of a logical 
operation on two such arguments will yield either —-1 or 0. 


2.12 Functions 


Functions are subroutines which take a number of parameters, and which return a 
single value. Functions are invoked by their use as arguments in expressions, the 
value of the argument being the value returned by the function. There are three 
classes of function, built-in, user and external user. 


2.12.1 Built-in Functions 


These are part of the BASIC language, and are described in Chapter 10. Unlike 
user functions the type of the result is not necessarily dictated by the type of the 
function name. For example the function ABS returns a result of the same type as 
its argument. Some built-in functions have optional parameters, and some allow 
different parameter types, neither of which is possible with user functions. 


2.12.2 User Functions. 


User functions are defined by the DEF FN command. This associates a name with 
a formal parameter list and an expression. 


Function names take the form FNname/[type-marker], where the FN serves only to 
distinguish the name from variable names, and does not count toward the forty 
possible characters of the name part. As with variables, functions with the same 
name but different types are different functions. 


The formal parameter list declares a number of variables local to the function. 
When the function is invoked, actual parameters must be given which conform in 
number and type to the formal parameters — noting that BASIC will automatically 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 139 





Chapter 2: The Elements of BASIC 


change numeric types as required. The actual parameters are expressions, which 
are evaluated before the function is called, and whose values are copied to the 
formal parameters. 


The body of the function is a single expression. It is not possible to have any form 
of control structure in a function. The expression may include references to other 
functions and to global variables as well as the formal parameters — though, of 
course, a formal parameter with the same name as a global variable makes the 
global variable's value inaccessible. 


When a function is evaluated the result of the expression is converted to the same 
type as the function name, and the converted value returned. 


2.12.3 External User Functions 


An external user function is a machine code subroutine whose address in memory 
has been declared in a DEF USR command. External user functions take one 
parameter of any type, and may return a value of any type. See Appendix III for a 
full description of the support for externally developed subroutines. 


2.13 Decimal Fractions and Binary 
Floating Point 


It is a sad fact that few decimal fractions have an exact representation as binary 
floating point numbers. Floating point numbers are rounded before they are printed 
so the inexact representation may be obscured. 


The effect may be seen when comparing values which are the result of separate 
sequences of arithmetic operations. The two values may appear equal when 
printed, but their binary representations are different. The same effect may be seen 
if two such numbers are subtracted and the result is not zero. 


The effect may also be seen when Single Length numbers are converted to Double 
Length. For example if 0.1! is converted to Double Length the result is 
0.1000000014901161#, which is close, but not exactly the same. 


Unless decimal fractions are avoided altogether, by multiplying all numbers by 
suitable powers of ten (treating all money values as pence, for instance) it is 
impossible to avoid these effects. They can be reduced by rounding explicitly using 
the built-in function ROUND, which will round numbers which print the same to 
exactly the same value. Alternatively the slight differences may be retained, and 
account taken of their existence when numbers are compared or subtracted. 


140 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 3 
Direct and Program Mode 


BASIC works in one of two major modes, Direct and Program. In Direct Mode 
BASIC takes lines typed at the console and processes them immediately the 
terminating carriage return is entered. In Program Mode BASIC takes lines from 
the program currently in memory and executes the commands in each. With very 
few exceptions all commands may be used in either mode. 


Note that Direct Mode is not available in Run Only versions of BASIC, but see 
Section 3.4 below. 


3.1 Direct Mode 


Direct Mode may be sub-divided into: 


Direct Commands 
In which commands are entered which are then immediately executed 


Program Input 
In which new or replacement program lines are entered, or existing program 
lines are removed 


Program Amendment 
In which existing program lines are altered 


Direct Commands mode is straightforward. It is possible to use variables in Direct 
Commands mode. All variables are lost, however, when Program Mode is entered 
using the RUN command. 


Program Input may be done simply by entering a line starting with a number. 
When the line is terminated (by carriage return) it is inserted into the current 
program, replacing any existing line with the same number. (Note that a line 
consisting solely of a line number deletes any existing line with that number.) The 
AUTO command causes BASIC to generate a sequence of line numbers for 
Program Input. 


Program Amendment is supported by the EDIT command, see Chapter 4. 


Note that BASIC does not perform any checking of program lines when they are 
entered or amended. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 141 





Chapter 3: Direct and Program Mode 





3.2 Program Mode 


In Program Mode BASIC automatically steps through the lines of the current 
program, obeying the commands it finds there. Lines are taken in line number 
order, except where explicit control structures dictate otherwise. 


Error Processing Mode is a sub-mode of Program Mode, and is entered when an 
error occurs while an ON ERROR GOTO is active. 


Except in Run Only versions, Control-C from the console while a program is 
running will interrupt it, causing BASIC to return to Direct Mode with a Break 
message. Provided the program is not altered in any way, it may be restarted by 
CONT as if the Break had never happened. 


Variables are preserved when BASIC returns from Program to Direct Mode, which 
may be useful when debugging a program. 


3.3 Suspending BASIC 


Control-S from the console causes BASIC to suspend program execution, or 
suspend output to the console or printer. A second Control-S allows BASIC to 
continue, as if nothing had happened. Any other character after Control-S allows 
BASIC to continue, but the character is remembered and may be processed later. 


Like Control-C, Control-S has no effect in Run Only versions. 


3.4 Run Only — Special Direct Mode 


There are two variants of Run Only versions — one with, and one without, a Special 
Direct Mode. 


The variant without the Special Direct Mode returns immediately to the system 
level if the current program fails or otherwise comes to a halt. 


The variant with the Special Direct Mode enters it when an error is detected or 
when a STOP or END command is executed. In this mode BASIC produces the 
prompt ‘Direct Mode’ and will accept a limited number of commands, namely: 


DIR MID$ GOTO 
PRINT LSET GOSUB 
LET RSET SYSTEM 


142 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 3: Direct and Program Mode 


BASIC will not accept any other commands, nor will it allow new program lines to 
be entered. Assignments must be preceded by LET. 


This mode is provided to allow the state of a failed program to be examined 
(PRINT) and perhaps altered (LET, MID$, LSET, RSET). If it is possible to ‘patch 
up' the program it may be restarted (GOTO or GOSUB). If the program cannot be 
restarted it can be abandoned (SYSTEM). 


If this mode is used, it is expected that the user will either be an expert on the failed 
program, or be advised by an expert. In the event of a program failing, it may be 
possible to restart it in order to avoid the loss of data. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 143 





Chapter 3: Direct and Program Mode 





144 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 4 


The Line Editor 
and Simple Line Input 





The Line Editor is entered by using the EDIT and AUTO commands, by typing 
Control-A, or automatically in the event of a syntax error (Error 2). BASIC is 
implicitly in the line editor during line input in Direct Mode —so the current line may 
be edited while it is being entered. 


At other times when BASIC fetches lines from the console a simple line input routine 
is used, which only allows character delete at the end of the current line. 


The EDIT command enters the line editor ready to amend the given program line. 
Syntax errors detected while a program is running cause BASIC to enter the line 
editor as if an EDIT command had been issued for the offending line. During AUTO 
when the next line number is generated and that line already exists it is presented for 
editing. At other times during AUTO, and in Direct Mode, new lines may be edited 
as they are entered. Control-A typed immediately after a carriage return in Direct 
Mode allows the previous line to be edited and re-entered. 


If the line number of a program line is changed while editing it the result will be 
inserted in the new position in the program, replacing any existing line, without 
affecting the original line. 


The line editor is not available in Run Only versions. Syntax errors cause BASIC to 
exit back to the system level or to special direct mode — see Section 3.4. 


Two line editors are supported. One is a screen based line editor’, which displays the 
latest state of the line at all times and provides a ‘point and change’ style of editing. 
The other is a command driven editor which does not display the current state of the 
edited line. 


In order to support the screen editing BASIC requires knowledge of a small number 
of screen cursor movement commands. To make the editor as easy to use as possible 
the form of the edit commands may be tailored for a particular keyboard. There is a 
table within BASIC which defines the form of the required screen commands and of 
edit commands. Setting up this table is known as ‘installing BASIC’. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 145 





Chapter 4: The Line Editor and Simple Line Input 


Copies of Mallard BASIC for the IBM PC (or compatible) or for one of the Amstrad 
computers are supplied with the screen-based editor installed for these machines. 
Copies for use on other machines are supplied with an installation program. 
Appendix VI describes the use of the installation program. The installation program 
is not supplied with versions of BASIC which are supplied installed for a particular 
computer. 


The advantage of the screen editing is that it is straightforward to use. The 
disadvantage is that an installed copy of BASIC is machine specific, and the editor 
may not function on other machines. The command editor, on the other hand, requires 
no installation, and is therefore machine independent. The command editor is, 
however, less convenient to use. The use of the command editor is described in 
Appendix VII. 


Since Run Only versions do not include either form of line editor they do not require 
installation. It may be useful, however, to use the installation program to set the 
console width and Auto CRLF column, which otherwise both default to 80. 


4.1 Simple Line Input 


When fetching a line for INPUT, LINE INPUT and RANDOMIZE, a simple line 
input routine is used. (On Run Only versions all line input is done this way.) Simple 
line input accepts all characters other than control characters and appends them to the 
current line. The following control characters have special effects: 
— Control-C (&H03) abandons the input, the line is ignored. Break action is 
taken. 
— Carriage Return (&HOD) completes the line and issues it to BASIC. 
— Backspace (&H08) or Rubout (&H7F) deletes the last character in the line; 
Backspace (& H08), Space(&H20), Backspace (&H08) is sent to the console. 
— Tab (&HO09) is inserted into the line and spaces are sent to the console up to 
the next tab position — tabs are set at every eighth column. 
— Line Feed (&HOA) is inserted into the line and Carriage Return followed by 
Line Feed are sent to the console. 


All other control characters (in the range &HO0...&HI1F) are ignored. All other 
characters (including values in the range & H80...& HFF) are appended to the line and 
reflected to the console. 


146 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 4; The Line Editor and Simple Line Input 


4.2 The Screen Line Editor 


The editor is a ‘screen based line editor’. That is to say it presents the current line on 
the screen and allows the cursor to be moved around within the line, and text to be 
inserted or removed at the cursor position. At all times the editor displays the latest 
state of the line. 


The commands accepted by the line editor are described here, and referred to by 
name. The actual keystrokes which invoke the commands are set when BASIC is 
installed, and may be any combination of characters, though it is expected that they 
will be single control codes or a control code followed by one or two other characters. 


The line being edited may be too long to fit on a single line of the screen. The term 
‘screen line’ refers to the portion of the current line which is displayed ona single line 
of the screen. The editor needs to know the width of the screen and whether the screen 
is performing Auto CRLF. This information is installed in BASIC, but may bealtered 
by the WIDTH command. 


4.2.1 Cursor Movement 


The cursor may be moved left and right along the current line, and up and down if the 
line occupies more than one screen line. When moving up and down the cursor may 
not be moved beyond the first or last screen lines used. The cursor may also be moved 
forward to the next occurrence of a given character. 


The cursor is not constrained to positions corresponding to characters in the line, it 
may, for example, be moved beyond a line feed or into the 'dead’ space between a tab 
and the next character. If the cursor is positioned on a character when text is inserted 
or deleted it will be moved left or right before the insertion or deletion is performed. 
The movement commands are: 

Cursor Left Move one position left. 


If the cursor is positioned on the first character of the first screen line this 
command is ignored. 


If the cursor is positioned at the lefthand end of the second or subsequent screen 
line it moves to the righthand end of the previous screen line. 
Cursor Right Move one position right. 


If thecursor is positioned on the last character of the last screen line this command 
is ignored. 


If the cursor is positioned at the righthand end of the penultimate or earlier screen 
line it moves to the lefthand end of the next screen line. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 147 





Chapter 4: The Line Editor and Simple Line Input 


Cursor Up Move vertically up one screen line. 
If the cursor is on the first screen line this command is ignored. 


Cursor Down Move vertically down one screen line. 
If the cursor is on the last screen line this command is ignored. 


Find Character Move forward to the next occurrence of the given character. 


The command takes the next character typed (which may be any character) and 
searches forward down the line for it. Before the search starts the cursor is moved 
one position to the right so that the character at the initial position is not 
considered. If no such character is found the cursor is positioned at the end of the 
line. 


4.2.2 Adding Text 


Allcharacters typed which do not form editor commands are added to the current line 
— except that control characters (values &H7F and in the range & HO0...& H1F) other 
than Tab and Line Feed, are rejected. The way in which the character is added to the 
line depends on the Insert/Overwrite mode. The editor always starts in Insert mode 
each time a line is edited. 


The commands associated with the addition of text are: 


Insert/Overstrike toggle If in insert mode then set overstrike mode and vice 
versa. 


When acharacter is entered into the line in insert mode all characters to the right 
of the current position move right to make room. 


When acharacter is entered into the line in overstrike mode the current character 
is deleted and replaced. Note that overstriking tabs and line feeds causes the line 
layout to change. 


Insert mode is always selected when editing starts. 


Literal Character: ‘\'. The character immediately following the Literal 
Character command is not treated as a possible command, but as a character for 
addition to the current line. The character may be Tab (&H09), Line Feed 
(&HOA) or any character whose value is in the range &H20...&HFF except 
&H7F. 


The main use of the literal character command is in adding Tabs or Line Feeds 
when these characters are used as editor commands. 


The character '\' may be added to the line using this command, by typing '\' 
twice. 





148 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 4; The Line Editor and Simple Line Input 


Tab and Line Feed control characters may appear in the line, and may be added to it. 
These have special effects as follows: 


Tab is represented as spaces to the next tab position. Tab positions are at every 
eighth column. When the cursor is positioned on the first space then it is on the 
tab; when it is on a subsequent space then it is after the tab. 


Line Feed is represented as a space followed by a new screen line. When the 
cursor is positioned on the space or after the space but on the same screen line then 
it is on the Line Feed. 


4.2.3 Deleting Text 


Characters may be deleted implicitly by adding to the line in Overstrike mode. There 
are three commands which explicitly remove text : 


Forwards delete If there is no character under the cursor then move forwards 
until there is one. Delete the character under the cursor. 


Backwards delete Move the cursor one position left. If there is no character 
under the cursor then move backwards until there is one. Delete the character 
under the cursor. 


Delete to character Delete from the current cursor position up to but not 
including the given character. 


The command takes the next character typed (which may be any character) and 
searches forward down the line for it, deleting characters on the way. Before the 
search starts the current character is deleted — so the character at the initial position 
is not considered in the search. If no such character is found the whole of the rest of 
the line will be deleted. 


4.2.4 Finishing an Edit 


Finishing an edit may either issue the new version of the line to BASIC or may 
abandon it altogether. The commands are: 


Complete the edit and issue the new line If the line has a line number then it 
is inserted in place in the current program, possibly replacing an existing line. If 
in AUTO the next line number is generated and the editor is re-entered for that 
line. Note that if the line number has been changed during the edit the original line 
is not affected. 


If the line does not have a line number then it is treated as a Direct Mode command 
line, and is executed. 


(It is recommended that Carriage Return is used for this command). 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 149 





Chapter 4: The Line Editor and Simple Line Input 
Abandon editing The result of the edit is discarded. Abandoning the current edit 
also has the effect of terminating AUTO and returning BASIC to Direct Mode. 


(Itis recommended that Control-C is used for this command, to be consistent with 
the usual BREAK command). 





150 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 5 
Overview of Commands and 
Functions 


This chapter is not intended to describe the commands in detail, that is done in 
Chapter 10. Here the commands are described in groups, in order to give some idea 
of their purpose and to place them in context. 


5.1 Creation of Programs 


AUTO, DELETE, EDIT, LIST, LLIST, NEW, RENUM, SAVE 


The commands in this group are all useful when preparing a new program, or 
amending an existing one. Run Only versions exclude all these commands other 
than SAVE and DELETE. 


AUTO. is an aid to the entry of a new section of program. It generates line 
numbers as the new program lines are entered. 


DELETE removes lines of program en masse. 
EDIT allows existing lines to be amended. 


LIST and LLIST produce listings of all or part of a program to the console or to 
the line printer, respectively. 


NEW clears the program area, ready for a new program to be entered. 


RENUM allows all or part of a program to be renumbered. References to lines 
which are renumbered are updated. 


SAVE allows the current program to be written to a file. The program may be 
written in one of three forms: 


— ASCII a text file, in the same form as produced by LIST 

— Compressed a copy of the internal form of the program, which requires 
less disc space and will load more quickly than ASCII files. 

— Protected similar to Compressed, except that the program is encrypted. 
When a Protected program is loaded all commands which 
give the user access to the program text are inhibited. Once a 
program has been protected it cannot be unprotected. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 151 





Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 





5.2 Loading and Running of Programs 


CLEAR, CHAIN, CHAIN MERGE, COMMON, COMMON RESET, HIMEM, 
LOAD, MEMORY, MERGE, RUN 


CLEAR clears away all variables, closes all files and generally resets BASIC, 
except that the current program is retained. The memory available to BASIC, the 
size of stack to be used, the maximum number of files and the maximum random 
record size may be changed at this point. 


MEMORY allows the memory available to BASIC, the size of stack to be used, 
the maximum number of files and the maximum random record size to be changed. 


HIMEN The HIMEM function returns the address of the highest byte in memory 
used by BASIC. 


CHAIN, CHAIN MERGE, COMMON, COMMON RESET CHAIN and 
CHAIN MERGE enable one progam to load and enter another. With CHAIN 
MERGE all or part of the current program may be retained. Variables may be 
retained past CHAIN or CHAIN MERGE - all may be retained, or only those 
specified in COMMON statements. At any time COMMON RESET will dispose 
of all variables not specified in COMMON statements. 


MERGE allows a program on disc to be merged into the curent program. MERGE 
is intended for program development, and is not available in Run Only versions. 


LOAD discards the current program and variables and resets all other status. A 
new program is loaded and may be entered at once. 


RUN The simplest RUN command starts executing the current program. Other 
forms of the command cause execution to start at a given line number or are similar 
to LOAD. 


5.3 Program Termination 


END, SYSTEM 


END Programs stop and return to Direct Mode after the last line has been 
executed. END may be used to terminate the program at some other point, or 
points. 


SYSTEM The SYSTEM command causes BASIC to stop executing, close all 
files, and return to the System level. 


152 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 





5.4 Miscellaneous 


OPTION RUN, OPTION STOP, VERSION 


OPTION RUN disables the actions of Control-C and Control-S, which normally 
(except in Run Only versions) stop or suspend the current program. 


OPTION STOP enables these actions. 


VERSION is a function which returns information about the version of BASIC, 
about the operating system and so on. 


5.5 Control Structures 


FOR, GOSUB, GOTO, IF, ON x GOSUB, ON x GOTO, RETURN, WHILE 


FOR, WHILE BASIC supports two forms of loop, FOR and WHILE. A FOR 
loop has a control variable associated with it, which steps through a range of values 
— one per iteration — until a given end value is reached. The size of each step may 
be specified, including negative steps. The BASIC FOR loop is skipped if the 
initial value of the control variable exceeds the end value. NEXT marks the end of 
a FOR loop. A WHILE loop repeats until the given condition becomes false. The 
BASIC WHILE loop is skipped if the condition is false the first time. WEND 
marks the end of a WHILE loop. FOR and WHILE loops may be nested in any 
combination. 


IF commands may be used to choose alternative or optional actions. IF is followed 
by an expression. If the expression yields a non-zero value the THEN part is 
chosen, otherwise if it is present the ELSE part is chosen. Both the THEN and 
ELSE parts may contain more than one command, but they must all be on the same 
line with the IF command. IF commands may be nested on the same line. 


GOSUB, RETURN Simple subroutines are supported. GOSUB calls the 
subroutine that starts at the line given. RETURN terminates the subroutine, and 
returns control to the next command after the matching GOSUB. All variables in 
BASIC are global. Subroutines may recurse. 


GOTO causes an unconditional branch to the line given. 


ON x GOSUB and ON x GOTO commands evaluate the expression x, and use the 
result to choose one out of a list of lines to call or jump to. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 153 





Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 


5.6 Variables 


DEFINT, DEFSNG, DEFDBL, DEFSTR, DIM, ERASE, OPTION BASE 


DEFINT, DEFSNG, DEFDBL, DEFSTR Where a variable or function name is 
given without an explicit type marker BASIC assumes a type. The type assumed 
depends on the first character of the name (which is an alphabetic character). 
DEFINT, DEFSNG, DEFDBL and DEFSTR commands may be used to define the 
default type for each letter. Note that these default settings may be changed at will, 
but that the potential for confusion is enormous. 


DIM, OPTION BASE Unless otherwise explicitly declared in a DIM command 
the maximum for each subscript of an array is set to 10 by the first use of the array 
(implicit declaration), The minimum for each subscript of an array may be set by an 
OPTION BASE command to 0 or 1, but defaults to 0 otherwise. It is an error ‘to 
attempt to change this base value once it has been set, or once an array has been 
declared (explicitly or implicitly). 


ERASE Arrays may occupy large areas of memory. The ERASE command may 
be used to reclaim the memory used by arrays which are no longer in use. 


5.7 Console I/O 


INKEY$, INPUT, INPUT$, LINE INPUT, POS, PRINT, WIDTH, WRITE, 
ZONE, OPTION PRINT, OPTION INPUT, OPTION NOT TAB, OPTION TAB 


INKEY$ The INKEY$ function fetches a single character from the keyboard, if 
one is available. INKEY$ does not reflect the character to the console, and may be 
used in special purpose input routines. 


INPUT fetches a line from the console, and may interpret parts of it as numeric 
input and parts as strings, depending on the parameters of the INPUT command. 


INPUTS is similar to INKEY$, except that a given number of characters are 
fetched from the keyboard, and INPUT$ waits until that number have been typed. 


LINE INPUT fetches a line from the console without interpretation (but with line 
imaging) and assigns it to a string variable. 


WIDTH All output to the console interacts with the console width, as set by a 
WIDTH command (the default width is 80). BASIC will start a new line in order to 
keep the console position within the console width. The current position across the 
console is returned by the POS function. If the console itself starts new lines after 





154 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 





a given column position, WIDTH may be used to inform BASIC so that 
unnecessary new lines can be avoided. 


PRINT, ZONE PRINT outputs numbers and strings to the console. Numbers are 
output ‘free format’. PRINT divides the console into ‘print zones’ which impose 
some order on the output. The ZONE command may be used to change the size of 
print zones. The keyword USING introduces a format template, which controls the 
output of all further numbers and strings, without reference to print zones. See 
Chapter 6 for a discussion of PRINT and related commands. 


WRITE outputs numbers and strings to the console, inserting commas between 
each item and enclosing strings in double quotes. Numbers are output in ‘free 
format’. 


OPTION PRINT, OPTION INPUT OPTION PRINT allows the user to specify 
the address of a machine code subroutine which BASIC will use to send characters 
to the console rather than call the operating system. OPTION INPUT allows the 
user to specify machine code subroutines which BASIC will use to read from the 
keyboard. 


OPTION TAB, OPTION NOT TAB allow the user to turn on and off BASIC's 
standard conversion of Tab (&H09) characters into spaces when they are sent to the 
console or printer. 


5.8 Line Printer Output 


LPOS, LPRINT, WIDTH LPRINT, OPTION LPRINT 


These commands are equivalent to the console output ones. 


5.9 Files 


BASIC supports the reading and writing of disc files, with sequential or random 
access. In order to access a particular file it must be opened, at which time the 
access method is declared, and the disc file associated with a file-number. 
Thereafter the file is referenced using the file-number. A given file-number may 
refer to only one file at a time, but may be re-used once the previous file has been 
closed. 


Unless otherwise set when BASIC is initialised (see Appendix I) or in CLEAR or 
MEMORY commands, file-numbers are in the range 1...3. That is to say BASIC 
can handle up to three files at once. 


Chapter 7 contains further description of BASIC's file handling facilities. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 155 





Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 


5.9.1 Directory Access — all versions 
DEL, DIR, ERA, FILES, KILL, NAME, REN, FIND$, OPTION FILES 


DIR, FILES The DIR and FILES commands generate directory listings to the 
console. 


DEL, ERA, KILL The DEL, ERA and KILL commands delete files from disc. 
NAME, REN The NAME and REN commands rename files on disc. 


FIND$ The FIND$ function may be used to find the full name of a given file, 
including any file attributes. The file name given to FIND$ may include ‘wild card' 


characters and there is provision for finding the nth matching name. 
OPTION FILES may be used to set the default drive and user. 


5.9.2 Directory Access — MS-DOS 2 version 
CD, CHDIR, CHDIR$, FINDDIR$, MD, MKDIR, RD, RMDIR 


CD and CHDIR change the current directory on a specified drive or on the default 
drive. 


CHDIR$ returns a string containing the current directory on the specified drive. 
FINDDIR$ looks for a given directory and returns its name if it is found. 


MD and MKDIR make a new directory on a specified drive or on the default 
drive. 


RD and RMDIR remove a directory from a specified drive. 


5.9.3 File Inspection 
DISPLAY, TYPE 


DISPLAY and TYPE The DISPLAY and TYPE commands print a given file on 
the console. 


5.9.4 In General 
CLOSE, OPEN, RESET 


OPEN The OPEN command specifies the name of the file, the access method 
required, and the file number which is to be used. The file name is given as a string, 
whose format must conform to the underlying operating system’s rules. 





156 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 


CLOSE is the inverse operation to OPEN. If the file is open for Sequential Output 
any data still in buffers is written away. The disc file is closed and the file number 
released for other use. 


RESET The RESET command closes all files and resets the file system. A RESET 
command is usually required before discs are changed. 


5.9.5 Input Access — Sequential 
EOF, INPUT, LINE INPUT 


INPUT, LINE INPUT Input Access allows ordinary text files to be read. INPUT 


and LINE INPUT whose first argument is #file-number are similar to the console 
input commands, except that they read lines from file. 


EOF It is an error to attempt to read past the end of an input file. The EOF function 
may be used to detect the end of file condition, and avoid reading any further. 


5.9.6 Output Access — Sequential 
PRINT, WRITE 


PRINT Output Access allows ordinary text files to be written. PRINT commands 


whose first argument is #file-number are similar to the console output commands, 
except that data is written to file. Note that files are assumed to be infinitely wide. 


WRITE commands whose first argument is #file-number are particularly useful 
for generating files to be read at some later date using INPUT, since INPUT 
expects items to be separated by commas and the double quotes around strings 
avoid any ambiguity. 


5.9.7 Random Access 


CVD, CVI, CVS, CVUK, CVIK, FIELD, GET, LSET, MID$, MKD$, MKIS$, 
MKS$, MKUK$, MKIK$, PUT, RSET 


GET, PUT BASIC maintains a buffer for each file open for random access. The 
GET command reads a given record from disc into the random record buffer. The 
PUT command writes the current contents of the random record buffer to the given 
record on disc. 


FIELD Each FIELD command defines a template for the data in the random 
record buffer. Any number of such templates may be defined for a given file, 
allowing different record organisations in the same file. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 157 





Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 





CVD, CVI, CVS, CVUK, CVIK, MKDS, MKI$, MKS$, MKUK$, MKIK$ In 
order to read and write numeric data, particularly when FIELDs are used, a 
mechanism is provided to convert the numeric data types to strings, and back again. 
MKD$, MKS$ and MKI$ produce strings from Double Length, Single Length and 
Integer data respectively. CVD, CVS and CVI reconvert such strings. CVUK and 
CVIK are similar to CVI, and MKUK$ and MKIK$ to MKIS$, but operate on 
strings suitable for use as Jetsam keys. 


5.10 Constant Data 


DATA, READ, RESTORE 


DATA, READ All the DATA commands in a program, taken in line number 
order, make up a sort of file. This ‘file’ may be read using READ commands. 


RESTORE The position within this ‘file’ may be reset by RESTORE commands. 


5.11 Arithmetic Functions 


ABS, ATN, COS, EXP, FIX, INT, LOG, LOG10, MAX, MIN, RANDOMIZE, 
RND, ROUND, SGN, SIN, SQR, TAN 


ATN, COS, SIN and TAN are the usual trig functions (ATN is Arctangent), with 
angles expressed in radians. 


EXP returns the value of e raised to the given power. LOG returns the natural log 
(base e) of its argument. LOG1O returns the log to the base 10. SQR returns the 
square root of its argument. 


RND returns the next number in a pseudo-random sequence. RANDOMIZE sets a 
new seed for the sequence. 


MIN, MAX. MIN takes a variable number of arguments and returns the value of 
the smallest. MAX similarly returns the largest value. 


FIX and INT return integral values. FIX rounds its argument toward zero. INT 
rounds its argument toward —Infinity. ROUND rounds its argument to a given 
number of decimal places, rounding to nearest. (See Section 2.9.1 for a discussion 
of rounding.) 


ABS returns the absolute value of its argument. SGN returns the sign of its 
argument. 


158 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 





5.12 String Functions 


OCT$, DEC$, HEX$, INSTR, LEFT$, LEN, LOWER$, MID$, RIGHTS, 
SPACES, STR$, STRING$, STRIP$, UPPERS, VAL 


LEFT$, RIGHT$ and MID$ functions return part of the argument string. LEFT$ 
returns a given number of characters counting from the left end of the string. 
RIGHTS$ returns a number of characters counting from the right. MIDS returns 
some portion taken from a given position in the string. 


MID$ may be assigned to, so that a portion of its argument string is replaced by 
another. 


INSTR searches one string for the first occurrence of a given substring. 
LEN returns the length of its argument string. 


LOWER$, UPPER$, STRIP$ LOWERS returns a copy of its argument, with any 
upper case alphabetic characters replaced by their lower case equivalents. UPPER$ 
similarly replaces lower case by upper case. STRIP$ returns a copy of its argument, 
after stripping Bit 7 (the most significant bit) from each character. 


STRING$, SPACE$ STRINGS returns a string consisting of a given character 
repeated a given number of times. SPACES returns a string consisting of a given 
number of spaces. 


OCT$, DEC$, HEX$ and STR$ produce string representations of the value of 
their numeric arguments. OCT$ produces a string of octal digits, HEXS a string of 
hexadecimal digits. STR$ produces a free format decimal string. DEC$ produces 
a formatted decimal string — with format controls similar to PRINT USING. VAL 
takes a string and, interpreting it as a number in much the same way as INPUT, 
returns its value. 


5.13 Type Conversion Functions 


ASC, CHR$, CDBL, CINT, CSNG, UNT 
ASC takes the first character of a string and returns its integer value. 
CHR$ takes an integer value and returns a single character string. 


CINT takes a numeric value and rounds it to Integer, rounding to nearest. The 
result must be in the range —32768...32767. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 159 





Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 


CSNG, CDBL CSNG takes a numeric value and converts it to Single Length. 
CDBL takes a numeric value and converts it to Double Length. 


UNT takes a numeric value and converts it to an Unsigned Integer — see Section 
2.10. 


5.14 Machine Level Operations 


CALL, DEF USR, DEF SEG, INP, INPW, OUT, OUTW, PEEK, POKE, USR, 
WAIT, WAITW, OPTION INPUT, OPTION LPRINT, OPTION PRINT 


CALL, DEF USR, USR Two forms of external subroutine are supported. CALL 
invokes a machine code routine at a given address, passing a number of parameters. 
USR invokes a machine code function at an address previously defined by a DEF 
USR command. USR passes one parameter, and returns one value as the value of 
the function. See Appendix III for a more detailed description. 


PEEK and POKE read and write bytes of machine memory. 


DEF SEG is used in Mallard-86 to specify the segment part of addresses used in 
CALL, USR, PEEK and POKE commands. DEF SEG commands are ignored in 
Mallard-80. 


INP, INPW, OUT, OUTW, WAIT, WAITW INP, OUT and WAIT give access 
to machine I/O space. INPW, OUTW and WAITW give access to machine I/O 
space organised as words. 


OPTION INPUT, OPTION LPRINT, OPTION PRINT allow the user to 
specify machine language subroutines which BASIC will use for keyboard input, 
printer output and console output rather than the usual operating system calls. 


5.15 Error Trapping 


ERL, ERR, ERROR, ON ERROR GOTO, OSERR, RESUME 


ERL, ERR, ERROR, ON ERROR GOTO, RESUME When BASIC detects an 
error its default action is to issue an error message and return to Direct Mode. This 
action may be overridden by an ON ERROR GOTO command, which sets the line 
number of a routine to process errors. When an error occurs ERL is set to the 
current line number, and ERR is set to the error number. The error processing 
routine may inspect these variables to decide whether it is capable of recovering or 
not. The RESUME command may be used to return to normal running. 





160 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 





OSERR Some operating systems return a number of miscellaneous but interesting 
errors to BASIC. Rather than have a different set of BASIC errors for each such 
operating system BASIC provides the single error number 21 and the function 
OSERR. When an error 21 has occurred the function OSERR will return an 
operating system dependent number which will identify the error. 


5.16 Program Development 


CONT, STOP, TRON, TROFF 


Run Only versions exclude all these commands other than STOP, which has the 
same effect as END. 


STOP, CONT The STOP command halts a program in such a way that it may be 
restarted by CONT (provided the program is not altered in the meantime). STOP 
commands may be inserted in a program to halt it at interesting points so that the 
state of the program and variables may be examined. 


TRON, TROFF TRON and TROFF turn on and off a tracing mechanism. When 
tracing is enabled, before each line is executed its number is printed on the console, 
enclosed in square brackets. This provides a simple trace of the program’s 
execution. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 161 





Chapter 5: Overview of Commands and Functions 





162 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 6 
Introduction to Printing 


This chapter describes the facilities BASIC provides for the output of numbers and 
strings. These facilities are provided by the various PRINT commands, namely 
PRINT, PRINT # and LPRINT. 


All of these commands will print numbers and strings in Free Format, in which 
BASIC will: 


— print numbers using the minimum number of characters possible. 

— print strings literally, except for Tab expansion on the console and printer 
(but not on file output). 

— organise output into ‘print zones’ if requested. 

— generate a new line if a print item will not fit on the current line. 


With the USING option these commands will print numbers and strings in formats 
dictated by a template string provided by the user, thus: 

— numbers may be printed with a specified number of digits. 

— numbers may be printed with commas after thousands, millions etc. 

— numbers may be printed in a specified ‘scientific’ form. 

— part or all of strings may be printed, with Tab expansion on the console and 

printer (but not on file output). 
— print zones are ignored. 
— new lines are generated only when a line is completely filled. 


Printing to the console (PRINT), printing to the printer (LPRINT) and printing to a 
file PRINT #) all work in the same way. To support 'print zones', tab expansion and 
the TAB function BASIC maintains a logical position by keeping track of the 
characters which have been output — see Section 6.3 below. 


The console and printer have widths associated with them. BASIC will generate a 
new line if the logical position reaches the device width. In Free Format printing 
BASIC will generate a new line before printing an object if that object would not fit 
between the logical position and the device width. Files are treated as being infinitely 
wide. The console and printer widths are settable, and may be set infinitely wide. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 163 





Chapter 6: Introduction to Printing 





6.1 Operation of a Print Statement 


A print command may be followed by a number of print items, separated by either 
commas or semicolons. An item may bea string or numeric expression, or a TAB or 
SPC print function. Each expression is evaluated and the result printed in ‘free 
format'. A comma following the expression causes BASIC to advance to the 
beginning of the next ‘print zone’ after the item is printed. A semicolon serves only 
to separate the items, and has no effect on the output. 


Two special functions, TAB and SPC, are supported only in print commands. TAB 
prints spaces to move to the given print position. SPC prints a given number of spaces. 
TAB and SPC print functions are treated as if they were followed by a semicolon. 


Formatted printing is introduced by the USING keyword, followed by a string 
expression which gives the format template. The template is followed by a number 
of expressions, whose values are to be printed. Commas or semicolons may be used 
to separate the expressions — neither has any effect on the output. 


Whenall the arguments ofa print command have been processed a new line is started, 
unless the command ends in a comma, semicolon or TAB or SPC. 


6.2 Control Character Handling 


When given a Tab (&H09) character to print on the console or printer BASIC usually 
transforms it into a number of spaces, sufficient to move forward to the next tab 
position — where tabs are implicitly set every eighth column. This action is 
independent of any characters which precede the Tab, so if the value & HO9 forms part 
of an escape sequence BASIC is unaware of the fact, and transforms the Tab. The 
commands OPTION NOT TAB and OPTION TAB may be used to inhibit and re- 
enable, respectively, this tab expansion. 


All other control characters are output as directly as possible, avoiding as much 
interference from the operating system as it will allow. 


6.3 Logical Position 


The logical position starts at column 1, Each time a character is printed the position 
is incremented by one, except for the following characters: 


— Backspace (&HO08), which counts as minus one. 
— Tab (&H09) which if expanded into spaces counts 1 for each space. 


164 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 6: Introduction to Printing 





— Carriage Return (&HOD), which resets the position to 1. 
— Other control characters in the range &H00..&HIF, which count as 0. 


The logical position may not correspond to the actual position after control sequences 
have been output. 


6.4 Free Format Printing 


The results of numeric expressions are printed as described below. The result of string 
expressions are output character by character after BASIC has checked that the string 
fits. The effects of SPC and TAB are described below. 


A comma following a print item causes BASIC to space forward to the start of the 
next print zone before processing the next expression. A semicolon simply separates 
items. 


6.4.1 Print Zones and Device Width 


BASIC divides the output line into zones, whose width is set by the ZONE command, 
and which by default are 15 characters wide. When a print command spaces forward 
to the next print zone BASIC will start a new line if there are less than 'zone width’ 
characters to the edge of the device. 


Before printing any item BASIC checks that there is enough room for it between the 
current position and the edge of the device (as defined by the current WIDTH), unless 
the current position is the beginning of the line. If there is not enough room, a new 
line is started before the result is printed. When printing the result of a string 
expression BASIC uses the length of the resulting string when testing whether there 
is enough room. Note that this length is unlikely to correspond to the amount of room 
required for the string if it contains control characters. 


6.4.2 Free Format Number Printing 


Positive numbers are preceded by a space; negative numbers by a minus sign. All 
numbers are followed by a space. 


All numbers are printed with the minimum of characters. No decimal point is printed 
if there are no significant fraction digits. At least one digit is printed before any 
decimal point — so numbers may include a leading zero. 


Single length numbers are printed in scaled format (with an exponent) if they cannot 
be accurately represented by a number with seven or less digits (excluding a possible 
leading zero). 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 165 





Chapter 6: Introduction to Printing 


Double length numbers are printed in scaled format (with an exponent) if they cannot 
be accurately represented by a number with sixteen or less digits (excluding a 
possible leading zero). 


6.4.3 SPC Print Function 


SPC prints a given number of spaces, starting unconditionally at the current position. 
SPACES is not quite equivalent, since BASIC would check that the string fitted on 
the current line, and possibly issue a carriage return before the spaces. 


SPC need not be followed by a comma or semicolon, a semicolon is assumed 
(including when SPC is the last item in the print command). 


6.4.4 TAB Print Function 


TAB prints spaces to move to a given print position. If the required print position is 
atorafter the current position, spaces are printed until the required position is reached 
(this may print nothing at all). If the required print position is before the current 
position, BASIC issues a new line followed by spaces to reach the required position 
on the new line. 


TAB need not be followed by a comma or semicolon; a semicolon is assumed 
(including when TAB is the last item in the print command). 


6.5 USING Formatted Printing 


USING formatted printing is introduced by the USING keyword followed by a string 
expression giving the required format template. A number of numeric and string 
expressions may follow, separated by commas or semicolons. The expressions are 
evaluated in turn and then the template is processed to find a suitable format 
specification for each result. If the template string is exhausted while searching for 
a format specification the process is restarted from the beginning of the string. If no 
suitable format is found an error (Error 5) is generated. 


Note that USING Formatted printing, unlike Free Format printing, does not perform 
any print zoning or checking for room on the current line. 





166 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 6: Introduction to Printing 





6.5.1 Format Template 


The format template is a string which is interpreted character by character to control 
the way in which the result of each expression is printed. The meaning of characters 
in the template is described below. The following characters are recognised in format 
specifications (Note: Character set dependent — see Appendix VIII) : 


IN&#.4+—* $4, 


If other characters are encountered when searching the template for a format 
specification they will be printed and the search will continue. If one of the above 
characters is found out of context it too will be printed. The "_" character is not 
printed, but causes the following character to be printed "as is". 


6.5.2 Format Specifications suitable for Strings 
! Only the first character of the string is printed. 


\spaces\ The first n characters of the string are printed, where the string 
\spaces\ is n characters long. 


& The complete string is printed "as is”. 


6.5.3 Format Specifications suitable for Numbers 


Numbers may be printed without an exponent part (unscaled) or with one (scaled). 
A format specification for a number may not exceed 24 characters, not counting the 
exponent and trailing sign options. 


Numbers are rounded to the number of digits printed. 

Note: The characters used here are character set dependent — see Appendix VIII. 
The Body of a Number 

tt Each # specifies a digit position. At least one # must be specified. 


Specifies the position of the decimal point. There may be at most one. in 
a number format specification. 


F May appear before .; specifies a digit position, and also requests that digits 


before the decimal point be divided into groups of three, separated by 
commas. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 167 





Chapter 6: Introduction to Printing 


Leading Dollar and Asterisk Options The following are mutually exclusive 
options. These options must be specified immediately before the body of the number: 


$$ Specifies two digit positions. Specifies that a $ sign be printed 
immediately before the first digit or decimal point (after any leading sign). 
Note that the $ will occupy one of the ‘digit’ positions. 


we Specifies two digit positions. Specifies thatany leading spaces be replaced 
by asterisks. 
#xS Specifies three digit positions. Acts as the previous two options combined. 


Sign Options The default is for — to be printed immediately before the number (and 
any leading dollar) if the number is negative, and no sign at all if the number is 
positive. The — will occupy one of the digit positions before the decimal point. 


It is possible to specify that + be printed for positive numbers, or that the sign is to 
follow the number. 


+ Specifies that + or — is to be printed, as appropriate. 


If the + appears at the beginning of the format specification, the sign is 
printed immediately before the number (and any leading dollar). 


If the + appears at the end of the format specification, the sign is printed 
after the number (and any exponent part). 


- May only appear at the end of a format specification. Causes a — to be 
printed if the number is negative, and a space to be printed if it is positive. 
This sign indication is printed after the number (and any exponent part). 


Exponent Option 


AANA following the body of the number, and preceding any trailing sign 
indication, enables the exponent option. The four characters reserve space 
for the four character exponent part. 


The body of the number is printed with the maximum possible number of digits 
before the decimal point, reserving one digit position for the sign (even if the number 
is positive) if no other provision is made for it. 


Field Overflow If a number cannot be printed within the format given, BASIC 
attempts to get as close as it can to the required format, but precedes the result by a 
% to indicate field overflow. 


No number whose absolute value is greater than or equal to 10424 can be printed in 
unscaled format. Any attempt to do so causes the number to be printed in free format 
preceded by % to indicate a format failure. 





168 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 7 


Control of output devices 


This chapter describes the use of BASIC to access screen and printer facilities. 


Screen and printer facilities are selected by special control sequences, which are 
either single-character control codes or sequences of two or more characters, starting 
with the ESC character. Screen codes can be used to: 


— position the cursor 

— erase individual characters, sections of a line, or sections of the screen 
— insert lines between existing lines of text 

— enable/disable the cursor blob 


Printer codes can be used to: 

— initialise the printer 

— select the printer character set 

— enter special print modes 

— set page size, margin positions and tab positions 

— select character pitch, character style and line pitch 

— change print position 
To access a particular device feature, the appropriate control sequence is sent to the 
device, either as an individual item or, more usually, within other output. The facility 
to send these characters is provided in BASIC by the Print commands, PRINT and 


LPRINT. PRINT is used to send control sequences to the screen; LPRINT is used to 
send control sequences to the printer. 


The elements of the control sequences are handled by BASIC as single characters; 
they are interpreted at their destination. However, certain character handling 
facilities within BASIC need to be disabled to ensure that the codes are interpreted 
correctly — see Section 7.3 below. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 169 


Chapter 7: Control of output devices 





7.1 Specification of control sequences 


The codes used to control the screen and the printer are of two types: 


— Single-character control codes with ASCII character values in the range 
&HO00...&HIF 

— Escape sequences made up of two or more characters, the first of which is the 
ESC character (&H1B) 


The codes used to control the screen are defined by the operating system under which 
BASIC is being run. The codes used to control the printer are defined by the printer 
firmware. 


Details of the control sequences should be given in the appropriate reference 
documentation (ie. computer user guide, operating system manual, printer reference 
manual). The characters of these codes will be presented in one of three forms: 


— as the character itself, where this is a printable character 
— by giving the character's special name 
— by giving the character's ASCII value (normally as a decimal number) 


7.2 Transmission of control sequences 


Control sequences are sent to the appropriate output device by using Print commands. 
PRINT is used to send codes to the screen; LPRINT is used to send codes to the 
printer. 


The characters of the codes should be sent as single characters, either as individual 
print items in the Print statement (separated by semicolons) or concatenated in 
character strings. 


7.3 Interpretation of control sequences 
Interpretation of the codes is handled at the destination device. Correctly specified 


codes will have the required effect; an incorrectly specified code can access a 
different device feature and/or insert spurious characters in the output. 


170 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 7: Control of output devices 


The codes are output to the destination device as directly as possible. However, the 
following should be noted: 


(i) BASIC normally replaces any &H09 (Tab) character by spaces sufficient to move 
forward to the next tab position. Where the &H09 character forms part of an escape 
sequence, BASIC is unaware of this fact and will transform the Tab character. The 
commands OPTION NOT TAB and OPTION TAB may be used respectively to 
inhibit and re-enable this tab expansion. 


(ii) BASIC keeps track of the current print position by incrementing a logical print 
position; details of how this is done are given in Section 6.3. This logical position is 
used in conjunction with the device width to determine where BASIC should 
generate a new line. 


Where control sequences are output, the logical position may not correspond to the 
actual position. Moreover, BASIC may generate the new line in the middle of a 
control sequence, causing the code to be incorrectly specified. 


The new line is not generated if the device is seen as infinitely wide. This is achieved 
by setting the device width to the special value 255. Thus it is recommended that the 
command WIDTH 255 is used before any series of screen control codes, and that the 
command WIDTH LPRINT 255 is used before any series of printer control codes. 
A further WIDTH/WIDTH LPRINT command should be used to restore the device 
width. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 171 





Chapter 7: Control of output devices 





172 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 8 


Introduction to File Handling 


A major part of BASIC is concerned with file handling. The facilities may be 
categorised: 


Disc and Directory Operations 
In which BASIC operates on complete files or the names of files. 


Sequential File Handling 

In which files are treated as a sequence of characters to be read or written only 
in that sequence. The facilities provided are variants of those for console input 
and output. 

Sequential file handling will read and write simple ASCTI text files. 


Random File Handling 

In which files are treated as a collection of fixed size records, referred to by 
record number and which may be read or written in any order. A record may be 
organised as a number of named fields, or may be ASCII text. 

Unless special steps are taken, random files produced by BASIC programs may 
not be suitable for processing by other programs. 


Keyed File Handling (Jetsam) 

BASIC supports keyed file handling. Keyed files are similar to random files, in 
that the data is organised as fixed size records, and is read and written in the 
same way as random files. Access to the data is performed via an index in which 
user supplied keys are kept in key value order. 


Keyed files may only be processed by Mallard BASIC programs. 


Multiuser File Handling (16-bit systems only) 

Where the operating system will support it, versions of BASIC may further 
include facilities for file and record locking for use in multiuser systems. Where 
they are provided these facilities supplement all supported file handling 
methods, not just keyed file handling. 


This chapter describes all file handling other than keyed file handling, which is 
covered in Chapter 9. The keyed file facilities are an extension to the standard 
facilities, particularly random file handling, so this chapter is also relevant to keyed 
file handling. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 173 





Chapter 8: Introduction to File Handling 





8.1 File Names 


Whenever BASIC is presented with a file name all characters are converted to their 
upper case equivalents and have Bit 7 cleared to zero (cf. UPPER$ and STRIP$ 
functions). File names may contain only ASCII printing characters in the range 
&H21...&H7E except for []< >/\l=,; 


The "." character may be used to delimit file names and file types in the usual way. 
The ":" character may be used to delimit drive names and, on CP/M type operating 
systems, user numbers. Any leading and trailing spaces are accepted and removed, 
as are spaces around ":" and "." characters. The 'wild card’ characters "?" and "*" 
are accepted by some commands, and have their usual meaning. 


The MS-DOS 2 version of BASIC further supports MS-DOS 2 Tree-structured 
directories and path names. The "\" character may be used to delimit directory 
names in the usual way: alternatively, "/" may be used. These characters may be 
surrounded by spaces, which are ignored. Directory names may not include wild 
cards. 


8.2 Disc and Directory Operations 


These operations act on complete files or their names. Some of the commands have 
forms which are intended for use in Direct Mode, and which mimic the syntax of 
the equivalent operating system commands. 


The RESET command has two effects. Firstly, it closes all open files. Secondly, it 
issues a general disc system reset to the operating system. If you are using real disc 
drives, you may need to issue a RESET before changing discs, particularly if data 
is to be written to a new disc. 


The DIR and FILES commands produce a directory listing to the console. A file 
specifier parameter may be given, which may contain ‘wild card' characters in the 
usual way, to produce a listing of part of the directory. DIR and FILES commands 
may be abandoned by typing Control-C. Typing Control-S will suspend the output, 
which may be restarted by a second Control-S. (Except in Run-Only versions 
where neither key has any effect). 


The FIND$ function returns the full name of the first or nth file whose name 
matches the given name. If no such file exists then FIND$ returns an empty string. 
FIND$ when given a name with ‘wild card’ characters may be used to read all or 
part of a directory, for a program to process in some way. FIND$ when given an 


174 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 8: Introduction to File Handling 


unambiguous name may be used to check the existence of a file of that name. The 
name returned is the full name provided by the operating system, and may include 
Bit 7 markers on some characters. 


The DEL, ERA and KILL commands may be used to delete files. The file name 
parameter may include ‘wild card’ characters, to delete a number of files, but for 
safety's sake the form *.* is rejected. The DEL command is only present in 
versions of BASIC for MS-DOS (PC-DOS) type operating systems. The ERA 
command is present only in versions of BASIC for CP/M type operating systems. 


The REN and NAME commands may be used to change the name of a file. The 
commands take two file name parameters, the old name and the new name for the 
file. Neither parameter may contain any ‘wild card’ characters. If a drive name is 
given then both names must specify the same drive. A file with the old name must 
exist and a file with the new name must not. 


The TYPE and DISPLAY commands read the given file and display it on the 
console. In Direct Mode these may be used to inspect the contents of a file. When 
a program is running these may be used to print a quantity of information (for 
example a help file) without it taking up space in the program. When reading the 
file a SUB (Control-Z, &H1A) character is taken as end of file. TYPE and 
DISPLAY commands may be abandoned by typing Control-C. Typing Control-S 
will suspend the output, which may be restarted by typing a second Control-S. 
(Except in Run-Only versions where neither key has any effect). 


8.2.1 Tree-structured directories (MS-DOS 2 version) 


The MS-DOS 2 version of Mallard BASIC includes extra commands and 
functions, specifically for handling MS-DOS 2's tree-structured directories. 


Six commands directly mimic the equivalent operating system commands. MD and 
MKDIR commands are available for creating new directories; RD and RMDIR 
commands are available for deleting directories; and CD and CHDIR commands 
are available for changing the current directory. 


Two functions are also included. The CHDIR$ function returns a string containing 
the name of the current directory either on the default drive or on a specified drive. 
The FINDDIR$ function looks for a given directory and, if it finds it, returns its 
name. If no matching directory is found, then a null string is returned. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 175 





Chapter 8: Introduction to File Handling 





8.3 Opening and Closing Files 
and File Numbers 


Before processing a file it must be opened. The OPEN command performs this 
operation, in which the following must be specified: 
i. processing mode 

The file may be processed in one of the following ways: 

— Sequential Input 

— Sequential Output 

— Random Access (Input and/or Output) 

— Keyed Access (Input and/or Output) 


ii. the name of the file (or files, in the case of keyed files) 


This must be a valid file name, without 'wild cards’. Whether the file must or 
must not exist and other such restrictions depend on the processing mode. 


ili, a file number 

Once a file has been opened it is no longer referred to by name. The OPEN 
command associates the opened file with a file number, and all other 
commands use that number. The number to be used is specified in the OPEN 
command, and must be a number which is not in use at the time. 

File numbers are small integers in the range 1...maximum, where the 
maximum is by default 3, but may be set to some other value when BASIC 
is first started, or at any time thereafter (using a MEMORY or CLEAR 
command). 


iv. a file lock 
A file lock may be specified (for keyed files it must be specified). In 
multiuser systems BASIC will attempt to gain the lock when opening the 
file. If the lock cannot be obtained the OPEN fails. If no lock is specified 
BASIC will attempt a default lock. The restrictions on the locks that may be 
applied and the default lock depend on the processing mode. 


Other information may be required or may be specified for random and keyed file 
handling. See the relevant sections and the description of the OPEN command for 
more detail. 


Once a file has been opened it can be read or written (or both) as allowed in the 
given processing mode. The sections which follow further describe file processing, 
except for keyed files and multiuser facilities, which are covered in Chapter 9. 


176 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 8: Introduction to File Handling 





When all required operations on a file have been performed it must be closed. 
Closing a file has three main effects: 


— any output data buffered in BASIC is written away. 


— the operating system is informed that all processing of the file is complete, so 
that any outstanding disc operations can be performed. 


— the file number is released, and may later be re-used. 


The CLOSE command may be used to close some or all open files. Other 
commands implicitly close all files (for example RESET and RUN). Closing 
keyed files have further effects which are discussed in Chapter 9. 


8.4 Sequential File Handling 


BASIC expects sequential files to be simple ASCII text files. The file may contain 
characters of any value in the range &HO00...&HFF. On input only the following 
have any significance to BASIC: 


— Nulls (&HO00) are ignored, and are not passed to the program. 


— Carriage Return (&HOD) is treated as end of line (except following a Line 
Feed — see below), and is not passed to the program, though end of line does 
have other effects. A Line Feed (&HOA) immediately following a Carriage 
Return is discarded. 


— Line Feed (&HOA) is treated as a normal character (except following a 
Carriage Return — see above), and is passed to the program. A Carriage 
Return (& HOD) immediately following a Line Feed is discarded. 


— SUB (&HI1A, Control-Z) is treated as end of line and end of file. The EOF 
function may be used to test for end of file. It is an error to attempt to 
continue reading from the file once the end has been met. 


On output BASIC puts the characters it is given directly to the file. The only 
characters added by BASIC are : 


— Carriage Return, Line Feed (&HOD, & HOA) pairs for new lines. 


When BASIC generates a new line this pair of characters is appended to the 
file. On output to a file BASIC only generates new lines when required at the 
end of output commands (such as PRINT #). This differs from output to the 
console or printer, where extra new lines may be inserted when the device 
width limit is reached or exceeded. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 177 





Chapter 8: Introduction to File Handling 


— SUB (&HI1A, Control-Z) at end of file. 
When the file is closed BASIC appends this standard end of file marker. 


Note that, unlike console and printer output, BASIC never expands Tab (&H09) 
characters, but always sends them directly to the file. 


Sequential input allows a file to be read starting with the first byte and proceeding 
to end of file and then stopping. It is not possible to change the order in which the 
bytes are read. The EOF function may be used to test whether end of file has been 
reached. All console input commands and functions have equivalents for reading 
files (except INKEY$). INPUT # will read files as sequences of numbers in text 
form or strings of characters. LINE INPUT # will read a file line by line. 


Opening a sequential output file creates a new, empty file — erasing any existing 
file of the same name. Characters output to the file are appended to it. When the 
file is closed a SUB (Control-Z, &H1A), end of file, character is appended. All 
console output commands have equivalents for writing to files. The WRITE # 
command is useful for the output of data which is to be read using INPUT #, 
particularly where strings are involved. 


8.5 Random File Handling 


BASIC random files are a collection of fixed size records, each with a unique 
number in the range 1...32767. Different files may have different record sizes, but 
the records within a single file are all the same size. Records may be read and 
written in any order. The contents of a record may be text, read and written using 
PRINT #, INPUT # and so on. Alternatively, the contents may be given a field 
structure, in which the bytes in the record are treated as fixed length strings. 


When a random file is opened the record size must be specified (if it is not the 
default of 128 bytes is used). If no file of the given name exists an empty file is 
created. A file lock may be specified. On multiuser systems BASIC will attempt to 
acquire the given lock when opening the file, or will open the file unlocked if no 
lock is given — see Chapter 9. Once the file is open records may be read and written 
(unless the file is read locked, when records may only be read). 


BASIC maintains one record buffer for each open random file. The commands 
GET and PUT transfer data to and from that buffer. The program may read from 
and write to the buffer in a variety of ways. Although BASIC does remember the 
number of the last record read or written, it does not enforce any correspondence 
between the contents of the buffer and any particular record. This means that the 


178 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 8: Introduction to File Handling 





contents of one record may be read and then written, changed or unchanged, to any 
other record, and that the contents of the buffer may be prepared and then written to 
a record without reading the record first. 


Reading a record which has never been written is not recommended — the result is 
system dependent and may further be affected by the history of reads and writes to 
date. The first time a record is written space will be allocated for it, if required. 
Random record files are never reduced in size. 


BASIC does not impose any limits on the use of record numbers. The position of 
the start of a record within a file is given by its record number minus one, 
multiplied by the record size. On some operating systems the existence of record n 
requires that all n-1 lower numbered records also exist, and occupy space on disc. 
When allocating numbers to new records, therefore, it may well be advantageous to 
use the lowest numbers available. 


8.5.1 INPUT #, PRINT # and Related Commands 


INPUT #, PRINT # and related commands may be used to read from and write to 
the random record buffer. A random record may, indeed, be treated as a number of 
lines by these commands. 


BASIC maintains a pointer to the next byte to be read from the random record 
buffer. This pointer is set to the start of the buffer when the file is opened and 
subsequently after every GET and PUT command. Each time a byte is read or 
written the pointer is advanced. It is an error to attempt to read or write beyond the 
end of the record. When handled in this way each record of a random file may be 
regarded as a small sequential file, except that there is no equivalent of the end of 
file handling. 


8.5.2 FIELD Commands and Related Commands and 
Functions 


AFIELD command defines a template for the data in the random record buffer for 
the given file. Any number of such templates may be defined for a given file, 
allowing different record organisations within the same file. FIELD commands 
take the form: 

FIELD file-reference, list-of: field 

The file reference parameter specifies which open random file this template is for. 
Each field parameter takes the form: 


field-size AS string-variable 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 179 





Chapter 8: Introduction to File Handling 





The field size specifies the length of the field in bytes. The string variable is set to 
refer to the field. The first field parameter sets up a field at the start of the record, 
the second parameter sets up a field immediately following the first, and so on. 


Execution of a FIELD command causes the current values of the string variables to 
be lost and replaces them by the current contents of the fields (note that this may 
override the setting of strings in earlier FIELD commands). The string variables 
may be used in expressions in the usual way, the value of a variable being the 
current contents of the field. To change the contents of a field the associated string 
may only be assigned to using one of: 


LSET, MID$ or RSET 


because these commands are prepared to cope with assigning to a fixed length 
string. (A simple assignment to a string which is associated with a random record 
field breaks that association and creates a new string without changing the contents 
of the buffer. This allows the string variable to be re-used as a normal string once 
its use as a field is no longer required.) 


In order to store numeric data efficiently a mechanism is provided to convert the 
internal representation of numeric data types to strings, and back again, as follows 


numeric type: Integer Single Length Double Length 
function to create string: MKI$ MKS$ MKD$ 

string length: 2 4 8 

function to convert back: CVI CVS CVD 


Note that the strings produced are, in fact, copies of the internal form of the 
numbers, so numbers written this way are read back exactly as they were. This 
differs from other number input and output, where conversion between binary and 
decimal representations occurs. 


180 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 9 


Keyed File Handling and 
Multiuser File Handling 





Keyed file handling is provided by Jetsam, a general purpose keyed file manager 
embedded within Mallard BASIC. This chapter briefly describes the facilities 
provided by Jetsam. The Jetsam commands and functions are given in detail in 
Chapter 10. 


Multiuser versions of BASIC, under a suitable operating system, provide file and 
record locking facilities for keyed files and for ordinary random and sequential 
files. 


For each keyed file Jetsam in fact maintains two files. Throughout this description 
the pair of files will be referred to as the ‘keyed file’. The component files are called 
the ‘data file' and the ‘index file’, the functions of which are as follows: 


e The Data File, which contains the user's data 
This is a standard BASIC random access file, except that the first 128 bytes (or 
so) of the file and the first 2 bytes of each record are reserved by Jetsam. When 
reading and writing data the usual GET and PUT commands are used, but the 
record numbers are provided by Jetsam, not by the user's program. The user 
should take the two reserved bytes into account when defining the record length. 
In all other respects these bytes are inaccessible to the user. 


e The Index File contains the keys 
This is a specially formatted file maintained by Jetsam. Each key entry in the 
Index File has three components: 
i. Key Value 


Each key value is a BASIC string, up to 31 characters long. The key entries 
are kept in ascending order of key value (where keys are compared as 
described in Section 2.11.3). Several entries may have the same key value. 
A collection of key entries with the same key value is known as a ‘key set’. 


ii. Record Number 


Each key entry refers to a record in the data file. To find a record in the data 
file a program must first use Jetsam to look in the index for a key entry with 
the appropriate key value. Jetsam will return the record number which may 
then be used to read or write the associated data record. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 181 





Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 





iii, Rank 
There are eight ranks of keys. Each rank may be regarded as an separate 
index for the data file. Alternatively the rank may be regarded as the first 
character of the key value, so all keys of rank 0 have values less than all 
keys in rank 1, and so on. 
Jetsam commands and functions include parameters for all the file and record 
locking that will be required on multiuser systems. 


Single-user versions of BASIC simply check that these parameters are in the legal 
range, but otherwise ignore them. 


In multiuser versions of BASIC, the file and record locking parameters in Jetsam 
commands and functions are acted upon. In addition, ome of the ordinary BASIC 
commands and functions take extra, optional, file and record locking parameters 
which apply to ordinary random and sequential files. 


9.1 Consistency of Data and Index Files 


There are periods while a keyed file is being written to during which the data and 
index files are not consistent with each other. The first time either file is written to 
(since the OPEN) Jetsam sets a marker in both. These markers are kept in the 
reserved area of the data file and in the index file header, and indicate that the files 
are in an indeterminate intermediate state. When the keyed file is closed the 
markers are cleared. Should the system fail before the keyed file is closed the 
markers will remain set. It is not possible to open a keyed file in which the markers 
are set, which ensures that Jetsam will not operate on inconsistent files. 


Jetsam has a cache buffer scheme for the index files. Changes to the index file are 
made in main memory, delaying writing to the disc for as long as possible. The 
data file handling does not include any such buffering. It is quite possible, 
therefore, to make a number of changes without the index file on disc being altered 
while the data file on disc has been. 


Apart from the simple, physical, inconsistency problem there may at times be 
logical inconsistencies in the keyed file while a program is modifying it, 
particularly when there are interdependencies in the data. The marking scheme 
will also guard against using incompletely modified data, provided the program 
ensures that the data is logically consistent before closing the file. 


If several separate keyed files are logically linked the programmer should 
implement a similar marking scheme to ensure that the files are consistent with 
each other, given that Jetsam ensures that the individual files are internally 
consistent. 


182 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 


The marking scheme uses a generation number embedded in both data and index 
files. The files are marked inconsistent by increasing the generation number in one 
of the files by one and in the other by two. The files are only consistent when the 
generation numbers are equal. Before a keyed file is changed it is recommended 
that a copy of the data and index files is taken, so that in the event of a system 
failure the data can be restored to its last consistent state. (Note that the data and 
index files are marked as inconsistent with the back-up copies.) Closing the keyed 
file ensures that all modified data and index records are written to disc, and then 
clears the inconsistency markers. 


The CONSOLIDATE function has the same effect as closing the keyed file and re- 
opening it, except that outstanding file and record locks are retained. In an 
application where changes to the keyed file occur infrequently compared to reading 
of the data it may be advisable to CONSOLIDATE the keyed file after each update 
(or set of updates) and immediately make a copy of the new files. 


9.2 Multiuser Systems — 
Record and File Locking 


When several users in a multiuser system simultaneously access the same file some 
control on their access is required to ensure that they are all presented with 
consistent data. This is straightforward if all users are only reading the file, but 
more complicated if the file is being changed. 


When modifying a file in a multiuser environment the areas of change must be 
‘locked’ until the modification has been completed, when the areas may be 
released. The locking prevents all other users accessing areas which are changing, 
where they would otherwise be in danger of accessing incomplete or inconsistent 
information. 


When reading a file in a multiuser environment it may be necessary to ensure that 
the information does not change until some processing has been completed. In this 
case the areas which must not change may be locked to prevent any modification. 


There are two levels of locking: File and Record. File locking is done when the file 
is opened, files may be opened unlocked, read locked or write locked. Record 
locking is required when a file is open unlocked to control access to records. 
Record locking is not required when a file is open read or write locked. Record 
locks cannot be applied in sequential file handling. Records may be read locked, 
write locked or unlocked. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 183 





Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 


Single user versions of Jetsam require lock parameters to be given legal values, but 
otherwise ignore them — in particular there is no check that the locks are sensible. 
Multiuser software is, therefore, accepted by single user versions. Software tested 
on a single user version should work on a multiuser system, but code for dealing 
with failed locks will not have been exercised and the lock settings will not have 
been rigorously checked. 


9.2.1 Keyed File File Locks 


Keyed files may be opened unlocked, read locked or write locked, as follows: 

Unlocked Other users may also open the file, but unlocked only. All users 
may read from or write to the file. Record locking may be 
required to control access to the file if it is being modified. 

Read Locked Other users may open the file, but read locked only. No user 
may write to the file, so no record locking is required. 

Write Locked No other users may open the file, and the open will fail if the 
file is already open. The owner of the write lock has exclusive 
access to the file and need not use any record locking. 
Opening a file write locked does not commit the program to 
writing to the file. 


9.2.2 Random and Sequential File File Locks 


Ordinary Random and Sequential files may be opened unlocked, read locked or 

write locked, as follows: 

Unlocked Other users may also open the file, but unlocked only. All users 
may read from or write to the file. Record locking may be 
required to control access to the file if it is being modified. 

Read Locked Other users may open the file, but read locked only. No user 
may write to the file, so no record locking is required. 

Write Locked No other users may open the file, and the open will fail if the 
file is already open. The owner of the write lock has exclusive 
access to the file and need not use any record locking. 

Opening a file write locked does not commit the program to 
writing to the file. 


184 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 





9.2.3 Record Locking in Keyed and Random Files 


Records in keyed and random files may be unlocked, read locked or write locked, 
as follows: 


Unlocked There are no restrictions on what other users may do to the 
record or any of its keys. Any information about the record or 
any of its keys may be rendered invalid at any time. 


Read Locked Other users may also read lock the record. The read lock will 
fail if the record is already write locked. No user may write 
lock the record. 


A record may not be altered nor may any keys be added or 
deleted while it is read locked. 


Write Locked No other users may lock the record. The write lock fails if any 
other user has locked the record. The owner of the write lock 
has exclusive access to the record. 


A record may not be altered nor may any keys be added or 
deleted unless it is write locked (or the file is write locked). 


Write locking a record does not commit the program to writing 
to it. 


With Jetsam keyed files record locks are applied when a key for the record is 
found, not when the record is read. This ensures that the record cannot be deleted in 
the time between extracting the record number from the index and accessing the 
record, nor can any other change take place to invalidate the operation. 


With ordinary random files records may be locked and unlocked at any time using 
the LOCK function, and just before they are read and just after they are written by 
GET and PUT commands. GET and PUT when used with a random file will 
implicitly apply and release a temporary record write lock if the program does not 
explicity lock records, see below. 


9.2.4 Random File Temporary Record Write Lock 


The temporary record write lock facilitates the processing of random files which 
are open unlocked by removing the need to explicitly lock records; provided that 
records are processed one at a time. BASIC will maintain a temporary write lock 
on one record of each open unlocked random file, as follows: 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 185 





Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 





e when a GET command is executed: 
i. any temporary write lock is dropped. 
ii. any lock parameter is processed. 
iii. if the record is not read or write locked then BASIC implicitly attempts 
to apply the temporary write lock. 
iv. — the record is read. 
e when a PUT command is executed: 
i, the record is written. 
ii. if a lock parameter is present the required lock is applied and the 
temporary write lock forgotten. 
iii. if no lock parameter is present any temporary write lock is dropped. 


e when a LOCK command is executed: 
if a temporary write lock exists for the record being locked, then it is 
forgotten when the new lock has been gained. 


9.3 Finding Records and the Current 
Position in a Keyed File 


The index file may be regarded as a list of key entries in ascending order of key 
value, with all keys for rank 0 before those for rank 1, and so on. While processing 
a keyed file Jetsam maintains a ‘current position' which is the current key entry, if 
any. It is important to bear in mind that the current position is defined in terms of 
a key entry in the index, and although this position refers to a data record it does so 
indirectly. 


When a keyed file is open unlocked on a multiuser system other users may change 
the index at any time. The record locking is provided so that areas of the keyed file 
may be held constant while they are processed, even though the rest of the file may 
be changing. While a position is defined in terms of a key entry it is the record 
which is locked, which means that the record and all keys associated with it are 
locked simultaneously. 


To access data in the keyed file the program must use Jetsam commands to move 
the current position within the index, and may then GET and PUT the records 
whose numbers are extracted from the key entries. The program may remember 
positions in the keyed file for future use (provided, on multiuser systems, that 
suitable locks are maintained). 


186 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 


Various facilities are provided to move the current position within the index: 


move to the beginning of the given rank. 

reset the current position to a previously stored value. 

find the first key entry with the given value (in the given rank). 
move to the next key entry. 

move to the previous key entry. 

move to the next key set. 


These functions support both random and sequential processing of the keyed file, 
in which data is accessed and ordered by key value. 


On a multiuser system if the current position is not locked the key entry to which it 
refers may be deleted at any time by another user. Each time a seek from current 
position function is executed Jetsam first checks that the key entry still exists. 


Under some conditions the current position is not set, or is unset. That is to say it 
does not correspond to any key entry. 


9.4 Overview of Facilities and 
Recommended Use 


This section is a brief overview of the facilities provided by Jetsam, with some 
recommendations on their use. Some ordinary BASIC commands and functions 
are extended for keyed file handling and multiuser file handling. All commands 


and functions are described in detail in Chapter 10. 


9.4.1 Jetsam Sizes and Restrictions 


The number of keyed files open at the same time is restricted only by current 
maximum file number in the usual way (see the MEMORY and CLEAR 
commands and Appendix J). 


The minimum keyed data file record length is 2, both of which are reserved for use 
by Jetsam. The maximum record length is set in the usual way (see the MEMORY 
and CLEAR commands and Appendix I). The record length should be set to 2 





more than the sum of the item lengths in the FIELD command. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 187 


Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 





The maximum data file record number is 32767, as it is with all BASIC random 
files. The first 128 bytes of the data file is reserved for use by Jetsam, so the first 
record number depends on the record length: 


IF record length >= 128 THEN first record number = 2 
ELSE first record number = 2 + INT(127/record length) 


The maximum size of keyed file that Jetsam can manage is restricted by the 
maximum record number and the record size, but thereafter only by the operating 
system and available resources. 


Key values are strings of up to 31 bytes. Keys are compared on a byte by byte basis 
from left to right. UPPER$ or LOWER$ may be used to ensure that the case of 
characters in a key is consistent. Strings produced by MKI$, MKS$ and MKD$ are 
not really suitable for use as keys (but see Chapter 10). 


Eight ranks are supported, numbered 0 to 7. 


Jetsam maintains a cache for index files. The size of this cache may be changed 
using the BUFFERS command. 


In multiuser systems BASIC requires some space to keep information about each 
active record lock. The maximum number of record locks per file is set by the 
second parameter of the BUFFERS command. 


9.4.2 Creation of a Keyed File 
CREATE, RANKSPEC 


CREATE Before a keyed file may be written to, the data and index files must be 
created and initialised. The CREATE command creates both files, initialises the 
data file’s header and sets up an empty index. CREATE immediately opens the 
newly created file. When a new file is OPENed for output or for random access 
BASIC automatically creates it. This is not true of keyed files which must exist 
before they may be OPENed. 


RANKSPEC Each rank in a keyed file may be marked so that a new key of the 
same value as an existing key may not be added. RANKSPEC sets the ‘duplicates 
allowed’ status of a given rank. 


i 
188 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 


9.4.3 Opening and Closing Keyed Files and Files in 
Multiuser Systems 
OPEN, CLOSE, CONSOLIDATE, BUFFERS 


OPEN The OPEN command includes a keyed mode of access. The keyed OPEN 
requires both the data and index file names, as well as the lock requirement. The 
operation will fail if either file does not exist, if the files are inconsistent or if the 
lock is not granted. 


CLOSE It is most important to CLOSE a keyed file when the program has 
finished with it. If the file has been written to, all buffered data and index records 
are written to disc, and the file is marked consistent. All record locks for the file 
and any file lock are released. If the file is not explicitly closed the files will not be 
marked consistent and any locks will persist. 


For use in multiuser systems the OPEN command when applied to ordinary 
random and sequential files takes an optional file lock parameter. The CLOSE 
command when applied to random and sequential files will release any record 
locks. 


CONSOLIDATE The CONSOLIDATE function may be applied to an open 
keyed file causing all buffered data and index records to be written to disc, and the 
file to be marked consistent, without closing the file or releasing any record locks. 


BUFFERS Jetsam maintains a cache for index files. The size of this cache may be 
changed using the BUFFERS command. The larger the cache the more chance 
Jetsam has of keeping index records in memory, which improves performance. 
The store given over to the cache is subtracted from the store available to the 
program. The BUFFERS command allows a suitable balance to be chosen. 


In multiuser systems BASIC requires some space to keep information about each 
active record lock. The maximum number of record locks per file is set by the 
second parameter of the BUFFERS command. (Note that the default maximum is 
zero, So a BUFFERS command must be issued before any record locking can be 
done.) 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 189 





Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 


9.4.4 Reading, Writing and Locking Data Records 
GET, PUT, LOCK 


Keyed files The usual GET and PUT commands work with keyed files. The way 
in which these commands should be used is a little different to their use with 
ordinary random access files: 


1. 


iii. 


Creation of Records 

In ordinary random access files a new record is created by preparing its 
contents and then writing it using a PUT command, in which the new record's 
number is implicitly or explicitly set. The procedure is similar for keyed files, 
except the new record must be written using an ADDREC function, in which 
Jetsam allocates the record number and simultaneously enters a key for the 
new record into the index. 


Record Number 


Record numbers are under Jetsam's control, and serve only as pointers from the 
keys to their associated data. Only record numbers returned by Jetsam may be 
used by the program. If a program is to be used in a multiuser system it must 
only retain knowledge of those records for which it has read or write locks. 


Record Update 

Because Jetsam uses the first two bytes of each data record the program must 
firstly avoid these bytes, and secondly it must GET the record before 
modifying it, even if none of the user’s portion of the record will remain 
unchanged. 


When a record is PUT, a check is made to ensure that the information in the 
first two bytes is still valid. The operation of ADDKEY and DELKEY alter 
this information, so it is important that no ADDKEY or DELKEY is 
performed between a GET and a PUT to the same record. 


iv. Write Locks 


In a multiuser system the program must not write to a record which it does not 
have write locked. 


The LOCK function may be used to change the lock state of a record. The 
record must already be locked, so this function may only be used to change 
between read and write locks, or to unlock the record. 


Random Files in Multiuser Systems For use in multiuser systems GET and PUT 
commands for ordinary random files take an optional record lock parameter. In the 
case of GET the lock is applied immediately before the record is read. In the case 
of PUT the lock is applied immediately after the record is written. 


190 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 





The LOCK function may also be used with ordinary random record files. If the 
program does not apply explicit record locks BASIC will implicitly apply a 
temporary write lock before GETing a record and release it after PUTing it — see 
Section 9.2.4, above. 


9.4.5 Creating and Deleting Records and Keys: Keyed 
Files Only 
ADDREC, ADDKEY, DELKEY 


ADDREC creates a new record in the data file and inserts the given key for it into 
the index. Jetsam allocates a record number for the new record. Records may not 
be created in any other way. The creation of the new record and the addition of a 
key for it must be done together, otherwise there would be no means of accessing 
the record. The data for the new record is taken from the current random record 
buffer; Jetsam initialises the first two bytes which are reserved for its use. 


ADDKEY A record may have several keys, in several ranks. ADDREC sets the 
first key for each new record, ADDKEY may be used to set additional keys. 


DELKEY removes a given key for a given record from the index. If the only key 
for a record is deleted then the record is also deleted, and the area occupied by the 
record may be used by a subsequent ADDREC. To change a key value, therefore, 
ADDKEY should be used to insert the new key before DELKEY is used to remove 
the old key. 


9.4.6 Finding Keys & Changing the Current Position: 
Keyed Files Only 

SEEKRANK, SEEKKEY, SEEKNEXT, SEEKPREV, SEEKSET, SEEKREC 

All these functions attempt to find a key entry, specified in a variety of ways. If 
successful, the key entry found becomes the current position and the given lock is 


applied to the associated data record. Note: these functions do not read or write 
data; to do this use GET and PUT. 


SEEKRANK searches for first key of the given rank. SEEKRANK positions 
Jetsam ready for sequential processing of the data with keys in that rank. 


SEEKKEY searches for first key of the given rank and the given value. 
SEEKKEY provides random access to the data records by key value. Note that the 
key found may be the first of a key set. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 191 





Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 


SEEKNEXT searches for the next key after the current or the given position. 
SEEKNEXT may be used to process forwards through the keyed file. 


SEEKPREYV searches for the key immediately before the current or the given 
position. SEEKPREV may be used to process backwards through the keyed file. 


SEEKSET searches for the first key of the next key set after the current or the 
given position. SEEKSET is similar to SEEKNEXT, except that it skips past keys 
which have the same value (and rank) as the key from which the search starts. 


SEEKREC searches for a particular key value in a particular rank which 
references a particular record. SEEKREC may be used to move back to a 
remembered position — noting that on multiuser systems the program should have 
the record locked. 


9.4.7 Finding the Current Position: Keyed Files Only 
FETCHREC, FETCHKEY$, FETCHRANK 
These functions each return one of the components of the current position. 


FETCHREC returns the record number of the record referenced by the key at the 
current position in the index. While the record is read or write locked the record 
number may be used to access the data record. 


FETCHKEY$ returns the key value of the current position. 
FETCHRANK returns the key rank of the current position. 


9.5 General Remarks on Jetsam 
Commands and Functions 


Most Jetsam operations are presented as functions rather than commands. This is 
because they return a code indicating the result of the operation. To perform such 
a Jetsam operation, therefore, the function must appear as part of an expression! A 
statement of the form: 


return.codeS = SEEKNEXT (#1, 1) 


is recommended, though there are cases where the function may usefully appear in 
the conditional expression in an IF, 





192 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 





In the example given, Jetsam will attempt to seek the next key entry in file #1 and 
apply a read lock to it. The operation may succeed, but it may be important to the 
program that the key found is in the next key set, or in the next rank. The operation 
may fail for a variety of reasons. Each of the possible results produces a unique 
return code, which may be used by the program to decide what to do next. 


9.5.1 Errors and Return Codes 


Errors detected while executing a Jetsam command or function are signalled in the 
usual way, and ON ERROR GOTO may be used to trap them. Examples of errors 
are: 


— incorrectly specified parameters 

— illegal operations 

— attempting to read or write records without the required locks 
— general disc problems, such as disc full 


Jetsam errors are given in Appendix II along with all other error messages. 


The values of the return codes produced by the Jetsam functions and their general 
meanings are as follows: 


0 unqualified success. 


101 moved past end of key set. 
102 moved past end of rank. 

103. moved past last key in index. 
105 key not found. 


115 nocurrent position. 


130 file is read locked by another user. 

131 failed to write lock the record of the key to be added or deleted. 
132 could not read lock the record. 

133 could not write lock the record. 


The possible return codes for each function are given in the descriptions in Chapter 
10. The precise meaning of a return code is sometimes dependent on the function — 
in particular, whether the return codes are designated Success or Failure codes. In 
general if a Failure code is returned by a function then no change will have been 
made to the files, the current position or the lock state. Occasionally a Failure does 
have side effects, in which case they are explicitly stated. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 193 





Chapter 9: Keyed File Handling and Multiuser File Handling 


If a function returns a ‘lock failure’ (return codes 130...133) then the recommended 
actions are as follows: 


130 


131 


132,133 


194 


The file is locked by another user. Report the fact to the operator 
and await further instructions, since the other user may leave it 
locked for some time. 


When adding or deleting a key Jetsam has to write to the data record. 
If the record is not already write locked (and the file is not write 
locked) Jetsam will attempt to temporarily write lock it. This return 
code is produced if Jetsam cannot write lock the record. The record 
may be locked by another user, and the lock may soon be released. 
The program should repeat the operation a few times before secking 
operator intervention. 

The ADDKEY, DELKEY, LOCK and the various SEEK functions 
have a lock parameter. If this lock cannot be achieved the record may 
be locked by another user, and the lock may soon be released. The 
program should repeat the operation a few times before seeking 
operator intervention. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 10 


The Commands and Built-In 


Functions 


This chapter contains a detailed description of all Commands and Built-In 
Functions, and is arranged in alphabetical order of keyword. 


10.1 Definition of Common Terms 


The following terms are used throughout the section (Note: the special characters 
included in these definitions are character set dependent — see Appendix VIII) : 


address-expression 


array-variable-name 


expression 


file-name 


file-name-expression 


file-number-expression 


file-reference 


integer-expression 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


A numeric-expression which is converted to 
Unsigned Integer — see Section 2.10. 


The name of an array, which may include its 
type-marker. 


An expression yielding a value of any type. 


A collection of characters which will be 
recognised as a file name by the operating 
system. BASIC forces lower case characters to 
their upper case equivalents before presenting 
the name to the operating system. 


A String-expression whose value is a valid file- 
name. 


An integer-expression which yields a value in 
the range 1..,files, where files is the maximum 
file number set when BASIC was initialised 
(see Appendix I). 





Is: [#] file-number-expression 


A numeric-expression, which when rounded to an 
integer yields a value in the range —32768 to 
+32767. 


195 


Chapter 10: The Commands and Built In Functions 





line-number 


line-number-range 


line-number 


line-number-line-number 


line-number— 


—line-number 


logical-expression 


numeric-constant 


numeric-expression 


numeric-variable 


quoted-string 


record-number 


simple-variable 


196 


A decimal number in the range 0...65534. In 
Direct Mode a dot may be used instead, meaning 
the current line. 


A line-number-range specifies all lines whose 
numbers are within the inclusive range given. 
The range may take one of the forms : 


Only the given number is in the range. 


Lines from the first number to the second 
inclusive. 


Lines from the given line to the end of the 
program. 


Lines from the beginning of the program to the 
given line. 


BASIC does not support a separate boolean type. 
Integer value 0 is treated as false, and any other 
Integer value as True. A logical-expression is, 
therefore, an integer-expression by another name. 


See Section 2.4. 


An expression which returns a value of any of 
the numeric types — Integer, Single Length and 
Double Length. 


Note that this includes expressions previously 
categorised as relational and logical. 


A reference to a variable, which may be an array 
item, whose type is one of the numeric types. 


A quoted-string is between 0 and 255 characters 
enclosed in double quotes, or starting with double 
quotes and terminated by carriage return. 


An integer-expression yielding a value in the 
range 1...32767. Records in random and keyed 
(Jetsam) files are referenced by record-number. 


A reference to a variable excluding array 
variables. The reference may include a type- 
marker. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Chapter 10: The Commands and Built In Functions 





string-expression An expression which yields a value of type 
String. 
string-variable A reference to a variable, which may be an array 
item, whose type is String. 
type-marker One of the characters : 
% indicating Integer 
! indicating Single Length 


# indicating Double Length 
$ indicating String 
variable A reference to any form of variable. This 
includes variables which are items in an array, in 
which case suitable subscripts must be included. 


variable-name The name of a simple-variable, which may 
include its type-marker. 


10.2 Definition of Common Terms Used 
Only in Jetsam and in Multiuser versions 


The following further terms are used in the descriptions of Jetsam commands and 
functions, or standard commands and functions which are extended when Jetsam is 
being used. 


index-position is: rank , key-value, record-number 


The values of the component parts of an index-position 
must previously have been returned by Jetsam and, 
preferably, refer to a record which is locked. 


key-value A String-expression yielding a string whose length is in the 
range 0...31. 
lock An integer-expression specifying a record or file lock. The 


expression must yield a value in the range 0...2, which is 
interpreted thus: 





0: no lock or unlocked 
1: read lock 
2: write lock 


rank An integer-expression yielding a value in the range 0...7, 
which specifies one of the eight possible ranks of keys. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 197 


Chapter 10: The Commands and Built In Functions 





10.3 Common Terms for MSDOS 2 


The MSDOS 2 version of Mallard-86 supports the MSDOS 2 Tree structured 
directories and path names. In this version of Mallard, all the commands which take 
a file-name parameter accept path names as well. In addition, there are some 
commands and functions for manipulating directories. 


The MSDOS 2 version of Mallard-86 will not run under MSDOS 1. 


When using the MSDOS 2 version of Mallard, the file-name definition given 
elsewhere in this manual should be replaced by the file-name definition given below. 


The syntax of path names etc is as follows: 


drive-spec is: letter: 
path is: [\] dir-simple [\ dir-simple]* 
or: \ 
file-name is: [drive-spec] [path \] file-simple 
dir-name is: [drive-spec] path [\] 
dir-simple is: 
or: ie 
or: name-simple 
file-simple is: name-simple 
name-simple is: name-part [type-part] 
name-part is: file-char [file-char]* 
type-part is: . [file-char]* 
file-names, dir-names and the punctuation marks: \ . .. may be surrounded by 


spaces, which are ignored. 


The path separator character \ may be replaced by /. 


A path with a leading \ starts from the root, otherwise it starts from the current 
directory. 


dir-simple may not contain any wild-cards. The dir-simple . means the current 
directory; . . means the parent directory. 


name-part is at most eight characters long. 


type-part is at most three characters long. 


198 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


ABS 


Absolute value. Function 
Use. 

To determine the absolute value of a given expression. 

Form. 

ABS (numeric-expression) 


Notes. 

ABS of a negative value returns that value negated. ABS of a positive value 
returns the value unchanged. 

Associated Keywords. 

SGN 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 199 


ADDKEY 


Add a new key for an existing record. Jetsam Function 


Use. 

To add a new key to the index file corresponding to a record which already exists 
in the data file. The current key is set to this key. 

Form. 

ADDKEY (file-reference, lock, rank, key, record-number) 

The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 


The lock parameter specifies what lock to apply to the record once the new key has 
been added. 


The record-number specifies which record to add a new key for. The number must 
previously have been returned by Jetsam, and the record must be write locked. 


The rank and key parameters specify the rest of the new key entry to be inserted 
into the index. 


Return Codes. 


0 Success the key has been added, the current position has been set to 
the new key entry and the required lock obtained. 
116 = Failure a key of the given value already exists in the given rank, and 


that rank has been marked to reject duplicates (by 
RANKSPEC). The current position has been set to the first 
key of the given value in the rank, but no lock has been 


applied. 
130“ Failure the file is read locked by another user. 
131  =Failure could not write lock the record of the key to be added. 
132 Failure could not apply the read lock to the record. 
133 Failure could not apply the write Jock to the record. 


Notes. 


If the record to be referred to by the new key entry is not write locked (and the file 
is not write locked) ADDKEY automatically obtains a temporary write lock. If this 
write lock cannot be obtained return code 131 is generated. 


200 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


When the record was added to the file one key was inserted in the index for it. 
ADDKEY may be used to insert a second or subsequent key for the same record 
(for instance in another rank, where each rank is used as a separate index) or may 
be used to change a key by inserting a new one and using DELKEY to remove the 
previous one. (Note that the order ADDKEY then DELKEY is important — see 
DELKEY below.) 


If successful the current position is set to the key just added and the required lock 
applied, otherwise the position is unchanged except when the failure is 116. 


Associated Keywords. 
ADDREC, DELKEY, RANKSPEC 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 201 





ADDREC 


Add a new record and key. Jetsam Function 


Use. 
To add a new key to the index file and a corresponding new record to the data file. 
The current position is set to this key. 


Form. 

ADDREC (file-reference, lock, rank, key-value) 

The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 

The lock parameter specifies what lock to apply to the new record. 

The rank and key parameters form part of the key entry inserted in the index. The 
record number is supplied by Jetsam. 

Return Codes. 


0 Success _ the key and record have been added, the current position has 
been set to the new key entry and the required lock obtained. 


116 Failure a key of the given value already exists in the given rank, and 
that rank has been marked (by RANKSPEC) to reject 
duplicates. The current position has been set to the first key of 
the given value in the rank, but no lock has been applied. 

130‘ Failure the file is read locked by another user. 


131 ‘Failure could not write lock the record being added. 


Notes. 


The current contents of the file's random record buffer are written to the new 
record. Jetsam supplies the record number. 


If the operation is successful the current position is set to the new key entry, 
otherwise it is unaffected, except when the failure is 116. 


This is the only way to add data to the keyed file. Unlike other forms of file, PUT 
may not be used, because Jetsam must supply the record number and must initialise 
the first two bytes of the record. 


An error 131 may arise on operating systems where locking one record implicitly 
locks one or more other (usually adjacent) records. When Jetsam has allocated a 
record to this new data an attempt is made to write lock it, before writing the data. 
This attempt may fail. 


Associated Keywords. 
ADDKEY, DELKEY, PUT, RANKSPEC 


202 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


ASC 


Get ASCII value of character. Function 


Use. 


To get the numeric value of the first character of a string, given that the ASCII 
encoding of characters is used. 


The inverse of CHR$. 

Form. 

ASC (string-expression) 

where the string-expression yields a string at least one character long. 
Notes. 

The ASCII character set is listed in Appendix VIII. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHR$ 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 203 





ATN 





Arc-tangent. Function 


Use. 
To calculate the arc-tangent of a given value. The result returned is in radians in the 


range —n/2...+7/2 

Form. 

ATN (numeric-expression) 
Notes. 


While the numeric-expression may be of any numeric type, the argument is forced 
to Single Length before it is processed. ATN returns a Single Length result. 


Associated Keywords. 
SIN, COS, TAN 


204 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


AUTO 


Automatic line numbering Command 
Unavailable in Run Only versions 

Use. 

To aid the input of program lines. Causes BASIC to generate line numbers. 

Form. 

AUTO [line-number][, [increment] ] 

If the line-number is omitted 10 is assumed. 


If the increment and the comma are omitted then an increment of 10 is assumed. If 
the increment is omitted, but the comma is present, then the increment from the last 
AUTO command is used — unless this is the first AUTO command, when an 
increment of 10 is assumed. An increment of 0 is illegal (Error 5). 


Notes. 


While AUTO is running it generates line numbers for program entry. Each time 
AUTO generates the next line number the line editor is entered (see Chapter 4). If 
a line with that number already exists then it is presented for editing. If no line 
exists then a new empty line with the new line number is presented. 


AUTO continues until the editing of the current line is abandoned rather than 
finished normally. Leaving AUTO returns BASIC to Direct Mode. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 205 





or 


BUFFERS 


Set the amount of memory for use by Jetsam. 
Jetsam Command 


Use. 

To control the amount of memory reserved by Jetsam for its index cache, and, on 
multiuser systems, to control the amount of memory used by BASIC's lists of 
outstanding record locks. 


Form. 


BUFFERS buffer-count[ , lock-count] 
BUFFERS, lock-count 


The buffer-count is an integer-expression which gives the number of buffers that 
Jetsam may use, and must yield a result in the range 0...255. 


The lock-count is an integer-expression which gives the maximum number of 
locks which will be set at the same time on each file, and must yield a value in the 
range 0..255. The lock-count is ignored on single user systems. 


Notes. 


In the first form of the command, if the lock-count parameter is omitted then the 
maximum number of record locks is unchanged. In the second form of the 
command the number of buffers used by Jetsam is not changed. 


The more buffers allocated to the Jetsam index cache the better. At least six is 
recommended. Each Jetsam cache buffer requires 128 bytes of memory. The 
space used is subtracted from the space available to the program. The cache is 
shared by all keyed files open at any time. The memory used by the cache 
remains reserved even if no keyed files are open. 


While the syntax of the BUFFERS command will accept buffer-counts up to and 
including 255, in practice the maximum number of buffers that may be set is 
limited by the store requirement. 


When BASIC is first loaded no buffers are allocated to Jetsam. A program using 
Jetsam must, therefore, contain at least one BUFFERS command. 


The number of cache buffers may be changed at any time, but requires less work 
if there are no keyed files open. 





206 Mallard BASIC: Reference 





When BASIC is first loaded the maximum number of record locks is zero. To use 
any record locks, therefore, a suitable BUFFERS command must be issued. This 
applies to locking records in ordinary files, even though no index cache buffers 
are required. The operating system may impose an independent limit on the 
number of outstanding record locks. 


Each record lock requires 7 bytes of memory per file. The space used is 


subtracted from the space available to the program. The memory remains 
reserved when no locks are in use. 


Changing the maximum number of record locks causes all files to be closed, 
without marking any open keyed files as consistent. Keyed files should, therefore, 
be closed before this is done. 


Associated Keywords. 
CLEAR, CLOSE, OPEN, MEMORY 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 207 


CALL 


Call external subroutine. Command 


Use. 

Allows externally developed subroutines to be invoked from BASIC. 
Form. 

CALL simple-variable[ (argument-list) ] 


The simple-variable's value gives the address of the subroutine. The simple- 
variable must have been set to the result of an address-expression. 


The argument-list is a list-of: variable. The addresses of the variables in the 
argument list are passed to the subroutine. 
Notes. 


See Appendix III for a detailed discussion of the calling sequence, variable 
formats etc. 


In Mallard-86 the address given is the offset part of the full address of the 
subroutine. The segment part is given by the User Segment Base most recently set 
by DEF SEG. 


Associated Keywords. 
DEF USR, USR, UNT, DEF SEG 


208 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


CD 





Change the current directory. Command 


Use. 
For Mallard-86 MSDOS 2 version, this command sets the current directory of the 
specified, or default drive. 


Mallard-86 MSDOS 1 version, all CP/M versions and Mallard-80 all ignore this 
command. 
Form. 


CD dir-name 
where dir-name specifies the directory to use as the current directory on the 
specified drive. 


This command takes the rest of the current line as its argument, irrespective of 
colons or single quotes. 


Notes. 
The current directory is used implicitly in all paths that do not start from the root, 
ie. start with a\. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHDIR, MKDIR, RMDIR, MD, RD, CHDIR$, FINDDIR$ 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 209 





CDBL 


Convert to Double Length. Function 


Use. 

To take a given expression and return its value as a Double Length number. 
Form. 

CDBL (numeric-expression) 


Notes. 


Many decimal fractions do not have exact binary floating point representations. 
Converting a single length floating point number to a double length one will 
highlight the effects of this. For instance: 


100 DATA 0.1 
110 READ A! 
120 PRINT A!,CDBL(A!) 


produces: 
jd .1000000014901161 


Associated Keywords. 
CSNG, CINT, CVD, MKD$ 


210 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


10) 


le 


or 
or 


CHAIN _ CHAIN MERGE 


Chain into new program. Command 


Use. 


Allows one program to load and enter another, optionally retaining some or all of 
the current program and variables. 


Form. 


CHAIN string-expression| , line-number-expression] 
CHAIN string-expression, [line-number-expression] , ALL 


CHAIN MERGE String-expression[ , [line-number-expression] 
CHAIN MERGE string-expression, [line-number-expression] , ALL 
CHAIN MERGE String-expression, [line-number-expression][, ALL], 
DELETE line-number-range 


Where: 


The string-expression gives the name of the file containing the required program. 
If no type extension is given then '.BAS' is assumed. 


The line-number-expression takes the form of an address-expression, which gives 
the line number to start executing from once the new program is loaded, as 
follows: 


0 or absent execution starts at the lowest numbered line. 


1...65534 execution starts at the given line, if the line does not exist an 
Error 8 results. 


65535 returns to System level. 


ALL causes all variables in the current program to be retained. If ALL is omitted 
then no variables are retained, unless otherwise specified in COMMON 
statements in the current program. 


DELETE causes the lines in the line-number-range given to be removed from the 
current program before the new program is loaded. (DELETE may be specified 
with the CHAIN command, but is wholly redundant.) 


Notes. 


RENUM will renumber the line numbers in the delete line-number-range, but 
will not affect the line-number-expression. In CHAIN this expression refers to a 
line in a separate program, so cannot be renumbered. In CHAIN MERGE BASIC 
cannot tell whether the line-number-expression refers to a line which will be 
unaffected by the merge, so it is left to be consistent with CHAIN. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 211 





The differences between CHAIN and CHAIN MERGE are as follows: 


CHAIN CHAIN MERGE 


Deletes all current program lines. Deletes only those lines specified 
in the DELETE clause (if any). 


Resets all DEFINT, DEFSNG, DEFDBL __ Retains all DEFINT, DEFSNG, 
& DEFSTR settings. (So any common DEFDBL & DEFSTR settings. 
variables should have explicit types, or 

the new program must re-issue suitable 

DEF commands.) 


Resets OPTION BASE setting, unless Retains OPTION BASE setting. 
any arrays are passed to the new program. 


Actions common to CHAIN and CHAIN MERGE are: 


— All User Functions are forgotten. 

— ON ERROR GOTO is turned off. 

— All open files are retained. 

— RESTORE action is taken. 

— All active FOR, WHILE and GOSUB commands are forgotten. 


During a CHAIN MERGE operation a line in the new program with the same 
number as an existing line will replace the existing line. 


If a protected program is CHAIN MERGEd with an unprotected one, the result is 
a protected program. 


Associated Keywords. 
COMMON, LOAD, SAVE, RUN, MERGE, COMMON RESET 


212 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


CHDIR 


Change the current directory. Command 


Use. 
For Mallard-86 MSDOS 2 version, this command sets the current directory of the 
specified, or default drive. 


Mallard-86 MSDOS 1 version, all CP/M versions and Mallard-80 all ignore this 
command. 

Form. 

CHDIR String-expression 

where the string-expression yields a dir-name which specifies the directory to use 
as the current directory on the specified drive. 

Notes. 

The current directory is used implicity in all paths that do not start from the root, 
ie. do not start with a \. 

Associated Keywords. 

MKDIR, RMDIR, CD, MD, RD, CHDIR$, FINDDIR$ 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 213 





CHDIR$ 


Return the current directory. Function 


Use. 


For Mallard-86 MSDOS 2 version, this function returns a string containing the 
current directory of the specified drive. 


Mallard-86 MSDOS 1 version, all CP/M versions and Mallard-80 all return the 
string "\". 

Form. 

CHDIRS [| (string-expression) ] 

where the string-expression yields a drive-spec specifying the required drive. 

If the (string-expression) is omitted then the default drive is assumed. 

Notes. 

The returned string is: \ [path \] 


The returned string does not contain a drive-spec, always starts with \, and, if 
there is a path, terminates with a \. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHDIR, MKDIR, RMDIR, CD, MD, RD, FINDDIR$ 





214 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


CHR$ 


Convert to character. Function 


Use. 


To convert a numeric value to its character equivalent, given that the ASCII 
coding of characters is used. 


The inverse of ASC. 
Form. 


CHRS (integer-expression) 
where integer-expression must yield a value in the range 0...255. 


Notes. 
The ASCII character set is listed in Appendix VIII. 


Associated Keywords. 
ASC 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 215 





CINT 


Convert to integer. Function 


Use. 

To convert the given value to integer representation, if possible. 

Form. 

CINT (numeric-expression) 

The numeric-expression is rounded to integer, which must then be in the range 
—32768...32767. 

Associated Keywords. 

CSNG, CDBL, MKI$, CVI, INT, FIX, ROUND, UNT 


216 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


CLEAR 


Clear all variables and files. Command 


Use. 


To set all variables to zero if numeric, or null if string. Erase all arrays. Forget all 
User Functions. Close all files. This command may also be used to set the stack 
size and total memory available to BASIC as well as the maximum number of 
files and the maximum random record size. 


Form. 


CLEAR 
or CLEAR, high-memory 
or CLEAR, [high-memory] , stack-size 
or CLEAR, [high-memory] , [stack-size] , number-of-files 
or CLEAR, [high-memory] , [stack-size] , [number-of-files] , maximum-record-length 


High-memory is an address-expression which gives the address of the highest 
byte in memory which may be used by BASIC. If omitted the current setting is 
retained. 

Stack-size is an address-expression, which gives the number of bytes that BASIC 
should use for its stack. If omitted the current setting is retained. If present, the 
expression must yield a value of at least 256. 

Number-of-files is an address-expression which gives the maximum number of 
files that may be handled at once. If omitted the current setting is retained. 
Maximum-record-length is an address-expression which specifies the maximum 
random record size. If omitted the current setting is retained. 

Notes. 

It is only necessary to give values for those settings which are to be changed. If 
any values are given, a comma is required before the first parameter. 


The optional parameters allow maxiumum number of files, the maximum random 
record size and total memory size to be set in much the same way as in the initial 
command line (see Appendix I). 


CLEAR causes BASIC to forget any active FOR, WHILE or GOSUB commands. 


BASIC's stack is used during expression evaluation and to hold information for 
FOR and WHILE loops and for GOSUB returns. The default size of 512 bytes 
should be adequate for most programs, unless extremely deeply nested FOR or 
WHILE loops or GOSUBs are used. 


Associated Keywords. 
MEMORY, HIMEM, FRE, OPEN, COMMON RESET 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 217 





CLOSE 


Close one, or more, files. Command 


Use. 

To finish using files. 

Form. 

CLOSE [list-of: file-reference] 

Each file-reference gives the number of a file to be closed. 

If the file number list is omitted all files are CLOSEd. 

Notes. 

When a sequential output file is closed all outstanding data is written to the file. 


After a CLOSE the file numbers involved no longer have any file associated with 
them, and they may be re-used. 


CLOSEing a file number which is not in use has no effect, and is ignored. 
Jetsam Extensions. 
For Jetsam keyed files CLOSE closes both index and data files. 


In multiuser systems CLOSE releases any remaining file or record locks for 
keyed, random or sequential files. 


This operation is most important since it ensures that all data and index records 
are correctly written to disc and marks the data and index files consistent. 


NB: Keyed files which are not explicitly closed using a CLOSE command 
will not be marked consistent. The following commands implicitly close all 
files, and will leave keyed files marked inconsistent: 


BUFFERS (if the maximum number of record locks is changed) 
CLOSE (without parameters) 

SYSTEM 

RUN (where a program is being restarted) 

Associated Keywords. 

OPEN, RESET, CONSOLIDATE (Jetsam), CREATE (Jetsam) 


218 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


COMMON 


Declare variables to be retained during 
CHAINing or COMMON RESET. Command 


Use. 
COMMON statements allow variables to be retained selectively past CHAIN, 
CHAIN MERGE and COMMON RESET operations. 
Form. 
COMMON list-of: variable-reference 
where: variable-reference is: variable-name 
or: array-variable-name () 
Note. 


When a CHAIN, CHAIN MERGE or COMMON RESET command is executed 
all COMMON statements in the program at that time are found and obeyed. 
(This is done before any program lines are deleted!) At all other times 
COMMON statements are ignored. 


Executing a COMMON statement has no effect. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHAIN, CHAIN MERGE, COMMON RESET 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 219 





COMMON RESET 


Remove all variables which are not COMMON. Command 


Use. 

COMMON RESET is similar to CLEAR except that variables which appear in 
COMMON statements are not removed. 

Form. 

COMMON RESET 

Notes. 

When a COMMON RESET is obeyed all variables which are not named in 
COMMON statements in the current program are removed. 


COMMON RESET causes BASIC to forget any active FOR, WHILE or GOSUB 
commands. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHAIN, CHAIN MERGE, CLEAR, COMMON 





220 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


CONSOLIDATE 


Mark keyed file as consistent. Jetsam Function 


Use. 

Once a keyed file has been changed it is marked inconsistent. This command 
causes all outstanding information to be written to disc and the file is marked 
consistent. 

Form. 

CONSOLIDATE (file-reference) 

The file-reference must give the file number of an open keyed file. 


Notes. 
CONSOLIDATE returns an Integer value: 


— On single user systems the value = 0 
— On multiuser systems the value = the number of other users 
who have the file marked inconsistent. 


The action of CONSOLIDATE is similar to CLOSEing and OPENing the keyed 
file, except that CONSOLIDATE retains any outstanding locks. 


Associated Keywords. 
CLOSE, OPEN 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 221 


CONT 


Continue after Break, STOP or END. Command 
Unavailable in Run Only Versions 


Use. 
When a program has been halted by Control-C (Break) or by a STOP or END 
command, the CONT command will resume program execution. 


Form. 
CONT 


Notes. 
CONT will be rejected if the program has been altered in any way since it halted. 


222 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


COS 





Cosine. Function 


Use. 

To calculate the Cosine of a given value, given that the argument is expressed in 
radians. 

Form. 

COS (numeric-expression) 

The numeric-expression must yield an angle in the approximate range 
—200,000...200,000 radians. 

Notes. 


With angles very much greater than 27 the accuracy of this function becomes 
increasingly badly affected by the scaling of the angle into the range —m...+7. 
Rather than return a very inaccurate figure, BASIC will not evaluate COS for 
values much beyond the range given above. 


If the numeric-expression may be of any numeric type, the argument is forced to 
Single Length before it is processed. COS returns a Single Length result. 


Associated Keywords. 
SIN, TAN, ATN 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 223 





0 


1 


CREATE 


Create a keyed data file. Jetsam Command 


Use. 


To create and open a keyed file. Both the index and data files are created, 
initialised and opened. 


Form. 
CREATE [NEW] file-reference, data-filename , index-filename , 
lock[ , record-length] 

CREATE [NEW] file-reference , data-filename , index-filename , 

lock[ , record-length] , user-string 
The file-reference gives the file number on which to open the keyed file once it 
has been created. 
The data-filename is a file-name-expression giving the name of the data file to be 
created. 
The index-filename is a file-name-expression giving the name of the index file to 
be created. 


The lock specified is applied to the keyed file when it is opened. 


The record-length is an integer-expression specifying the length of the records in 
the data file. The length must be in the range 1...max where max is set by the 
MEMORY and CLEAR commands, and when BASIC is first loaded (default 
value 128). If no value is specified 128 is assumed. The first two bytes of every 
record are reserved for use by Jetsam. 

The user-string is a string-expression whose value is saved in the index file. The 
string may be any length, but if it is longer than 64 bytes it will be truncated. 
Jetsam does not attach any significance to this string, but the program may do. 


Notes. 


The files are opened and locked immediately they are created. The current 
position will be unset. It is an error (error 58) for either file to exist already. If 
the creation of one of the files succeeds but the other fails then CREATE will 
attempt to delete the one file created. One file without the other is a waste of 
space. (CREATE NEW will overwrite an existing file.) 


When a file is created all ranks are set to allow multiple keys of the same value. 
RANKSPEC may be used to mark individual ranks to reject attempts to add new 
keys with the same value as existing keys. 

Associated Keywords. 


OPEN, CLOSE, RANKSPEC 





224 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


CSNG 


Convert value to Single Length. Function 
Use. 

To convert the value of the given expression to Single Length representation. 
Form. 

CSNG (numeric-expression) 


Associated Keywords. 
CINT, CDBL, MKS$, CVS 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 225 


CVD 





Convert string to double length numeric. Function 


Use. 


To reconvert a string produced by MKD$, to recover the original Double Length 
value. 


Form. 

CVD (string-expression) 

where the string-expression must yield a string eight bytes long. 
Notes. 


MKDS creates an eight byte string, which is an exact representation of a Double 
Length value, requiring no binary to decimal conversion. The string may be used, 
for instance, to put Double Length values into a random record. 


Associated Keywords. 
MKDS$, CVI, CVS 


226 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


CVI 


Convert string to integer. Function 


Use. 

To reconvert a string produced by MKI$, to recover the original Integer value. 
Form. 

CVI (string-expression) 

where the string-expression must yield a string two bytes long. 

Notes. 


MKIS creates a two byte string, which is a representation for an Integer value 
requiring no binary to decimal conversion. The string may be used, for instance, 
to put Integer values into a random record. 


Associated Keywords. 
MKIS$, CVS, CVD 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 227 





CVIK 


Convert string to integer. Function 


Use. 
To reconvert a string produced by MKIK$, to recover the original Integer value. 


Form. 
CVIK (string-expression) 
where the string-expression must yield a string two bytes long. 


Notes. 


MKIKS$ creates a two byte string, which is a representation for an Integer value 
requiring no binary to decimal conversion and which is suitable for use as a 
Jetsam key. 


Associated Keywords. 
MKIK$, MKUK$, CVUK 


228 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


CVS 





Convert string to single length number. Function 


Use. 

To reconvert a string produced by MKSS$, to recover the original Single Length 
value. 

Form. 

CVS (string-expression) 

where the string-expression must yield a string four bytes long. 

Notes. 


MKSS creates a four byte string, which is an exact representation of a Single 
Length value, requiring no binary to decimal conversion. The string may be used, 
for instance, to put Single Length values into a random record. 


Associated Keywords. 
MKS$, CVI, CVD 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 229 





CVUK 


Convert string to single length integer. Function 


Use. 


To reconvert a string produced by MKUKS, to recover the original Integer 
numeric value. 


Form. 

CVUK (string-expression) 

where the string-expression must yield a string two bytes long. 
Notes. 


MKUKS$ creates a two byte string, which is a representation for an Integer 
numeric value requiring no binary to decimal conversion and which is suitable for 
use as a Jetsam key. 


Associated Keywords. 
MKUK$, MKIK$, CVIK 


230 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


CVS 





Convert string to single length number. Function 


Use. 

To reconvert a string produced by MKS$, to recover the original Single Length 
value. 

Form. 

CVS (string-expression) 

where the string-expression must yield a string four bytes long. 

Notes. 


MKSS creates a four byte string, which is an exact representation of a Single 
Length value, requiring no binary to decimal conversion. The string may be used, 
for instance, to put Single Length values into a random record. 


Associated Keywords. 
MKS$, CVI, CVD 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 229 





CVUK 


Convert string to single length integer. Function 


Use. 

To reconvert a string produced by MKUKS$, to recover the original Integer 
numeric value. 

Form. 

CVUK (string-expression) 

where the string-expression must yield a string two bytes long. 

Notes. 


MKUKS creates a two byte string, which is a representation for an Integer 
numeric value requiring no binary to decimal conversion and which is suitable for 
use as a Jetsam key. 


Associated Keywords. 
MKUKS, MKIK$, CVIK 





230 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


DATA 


Declare constant data. Command 


Form. 


DATA list-of: constant 

constant may be any form of numeric-constant, a quoted-string or an unquoted- 
string. 

a numeric-constant may be surrounded by white-space, which is ignored. 


a quoted-string may be surrounded by white-space which is ignored. The trailing 
double quotes may be omitted if the string is the last object on the line. 


an unquoted-string is between 0 and 255 characters which are taken to be a string. 
A comma, colon or carriage return terminates unquoted-strings in this context. 
An unquoted-string may be surrounded by white-space, which is ignored. 


Notes. 

All the DATA commands in line number order within a program form a list of 
constants which may be read into variables by the READ command. As each 
constant is read a pointer is advanced to the next one. The RESTORE command 
moves the pointer to a specified position in this list. 


DATA commands are not executed. The constants are not checked for validity 
until they are READ. Numeric constants may only be read into numeric 
variables. Strings (of either type) may only be read into string variables — noting 
that numeric constants will be treated as unquoted-strings. 

Associated Keywords. 

READ, RESTORE 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 231 





DEC$ 





Generate formatted string representation of number. 
Function 


Use. 

To create a string representation of the value of a given expression, according to a 
given format template. 

Form. 

DECS (numeric-expression , format-template) 


The value of the numeric-expression is converted to a decimal string given the 
format-template, which is a string-expression, which is interpreted as in PRINT 
USING. 


Notes. 
The format template is not a full PRINT USING string, and may only contain the 
following ASCII characters: 


+-$*#,.4 
See Section 6.5.3 for a description of format specifications suitable for numbers. 


Associated Keywords. 
STR$, HEX$, OCT$, PRINT USING 


232 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


DEF FN 


Define User Function. Command 
Illegal in Direct Mode 


Use. 


BASIC allows the program to define and use simple value returning functions. 
DEF FN is the definition part of this mechanism. 


Form. 
DEF FNaame[ (formal-parameters) ] = general-expression 


The name takes the same form as a variable-name (including an optional type- 
marker), the name of the function being FNname. The value returned by the 
function is of the same type as name. 


The formal-parameters take the form list-of: simple-variable-name. 


The general-expression may involve not only the formal parameters, but also 
other variables or functions. The result of the expression must be compatible 
with the type of the function. 


Notes. 


A user function is invoked when it is used as an argument in an expression. The 
invocation takes the form: 


FNname[ (actual-parameters) ] 


The actual-parameters take the form list-of: general-expression. There must be 
the same number of actual parameters as formal parameters. The type of each 
actual parameter must be compatible with the type of the corresponding formal 
parameter. 


The formal parameters are local to the function. Variables with the same names 
as formal parameters are not affected by invoking the function, nor are they 
accessible from within the function, 


If the type of the function is not explicit, then the default when the DEF FN is 
executed applies. If the type of a formal parameter is not explicit, then the default 
when the function is invoked applies. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 233 





DEF SEG 


Define Segment Base Address. Command 


Use. 
For Mallard-86 this command sets the Segment Base used in PEEK, POKE, USR, 
CALL, OPTION INPUT, OPTION LPRINT and OPTION PRINT. 


Mallard-80 ignores this command, 


Form. 
DEF SEG/=address-expression] 


Notes. 


The default value of the User Segment Base is the base of BASIC’s Data 
Segment (in which the user’s program and data reside). 


DEF SEG sets the User Segment Base to the value given. If the argument is 
omitted, then the User Segment Base is reset to its default value. 


The address referenced in PEEK and POKE commands is given by the offset in 
the command and the User Segment Base most recently defined by DEF SEG. 


The addresses of USR functions and CALLed subroutines are given by the offset 
in the command and the User Segment Base most recently defined by DEF SEG. 


OPTION INPUT, OPTION LPRINT and OPTION PRINT all have an address 
parameter, specifying the address of a machine code subroutine. The segment 
base part of the full address of the subrountine is given by the User Segment Base 
at the time the OPTION INPUT/LPRINT/PRINT command was executed. 


Associated Keywords. 


CALL, USR, DEF USR, OPTION INPUT, OPTION LPRINT, OPTION PRINT, 
PEEK, POKE 





234 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


DEF USR 


Define external function. Command 


Use. 

Provides an alternate mechanism to CALL for invoking external function 
subroutines. This mechanism allows for only one parameter, but allows the 
external function to return an anonymous value. 

Form. 

DEF USR/digit/=address-expression 


Ten separate functions may be defined, USRO to USR9. If the digit is omitted, 0 
is assumed. 


The address-expression gives the address of the external function. 


Notes. 


An external function is invoked when it is used as an argument in an expression, 
taking the form: 


USR/digit] ( general-expression) 


where the digit may be one of 0...9; if omitted then 0 is assumed. There is only 
one parameter, which is mandatory. 


USR/digit]'s may be redefined at will. 


See Appendix III for details of external subroutines in general, and restrictions 
and caveats on external functions in particular. 


In Mallard-86 the address specified gives the offset part of the full address. When 
the function is invoked the segment part is given by the User Segment Base most 
recently defined by DEF SEG. 

Associated Keywords. 

CALL, VARPTR, DEF SEG 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 235 





DEFINT DEFSNG DEFDBL DEFSTR 


Set default type for names. Command 


Use. 

All variable and function names have a type associated with them. This type may 
be explicit in the name, or implicit, depending on the defaults set by these 
commands. 


Form. 


DEFINT list-of: letter-range 
DEFSNG list-of: letter-range 
DEFDBL list-of: letter-range 
DEFSTR list-of: letter-range 


where letter-range is: letter 
or: letter—letter 
where the form letter-letter defines an inclusive range of letters. 


Notes. 

When a variable name without an explicit type-marker is met the current default 
type is assumed. The default type depends on the first character of the name. The 
default is set for each letter by the latest of these commands in whose letter- 
range-list the letter was included. 


DEFINT sets the default to Integer. 
DEFSNG sets the default to Single Length. 
DEFDBL sets the default to Double Length. 
DEFSTR sets the default to String. 


The initial state of the default type for all letters is Single Length. The state is 
reset to this by: 


LOAD, RUN, CHAIN, NEW & CLEAR 


236 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


DEL 


Delete files. MS-DOS (PC-DOS) Command 


Use. 

To erase a file or list of files. 
Form. 

DEL list-of: file-name 
Notes. 


This command is only available in versions of BASIC for MS-DOS (PC-DOS) 
type operating systems. 


Each file specified is erased. If a file name contains ‘wild card’ characters, then all 
matching files are erased. 


DEL takes the rest of the current line as its argument, irrespective of colons or 
single quotes. 


Erasing an open file is not recommended. On multiuser systems this command 
may fail if the file is in use by other users or if the file is locked. 


Associated Keywords. 
ERA, KILL 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 237 





DELETE 


Delete lines of program. Command 


Use. 
To remove part of the current program. 


Form. 

DELETE line-number-range [, line-number] 

Notes. 

Removes the lines in the given range, and has the following side effects: 


— All User Functions are forgotten. 

— ON ERROR GOTO is turned off. 

— RESTORE action is taken. 

— All active FOR, WHILE and GOSUB commands are forgotten. 


If the line-number parameter is omitted BASIC returns to Direct Mode after 
executing a DELETE, otherwise BASIC starts execution at the given line. If the 
line-number given is zero, BASIC starts execution at the lowest numbered line. 


Associated Keywords. 
NEW 


238 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


DELKEY 


Delete a key. Jetsam Function 


Use. 


To delete a key entry from the index file. If the key entry was the only one 
referring to the corresponding data record then the data record is automatically 
deleted. The current position is set to the next key after the deleted one. 


Form. 
DELKEY (file-reference, lock[ , index-position] ) 


The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 


The lock parameter specifies what lock to apply to the record referred to by the 
key entry immediately following the entry to be deleted. 


The index-position specifies the key entry to be deleted. If omitted the current 
position is assumed. 


Return Codes. 


0 Success the new current position is in the same key set as the deleted 
key (ie. it has the same key value as the deleted entry). 

101 Success the new current position is not in the same key set, but is in the 

& same rank, as the deleted key (ie. it has a different key value 
from the deleted entry). 

102 Success the new current position is in the next, existing, rank. 

103 Success the deleted entry was the last entry in the index, the current 
position is unset. 

105 Failure could not find the specified or current position. The current 
position is set to the first key entry in the key set which 
would immediately follow the specified key if it were in the 
index. 

115 Failure _ the index-position parameter was omitted and the current 
position is unset. 

131 Failure could not write lock the record of the key to be deleted. 

132 Failure could not read lock the next record as requested. 

133 Failure could not write lock the next record as requested. 


Notes. 


If the record referred to by the key entry to be deleted is not write locked, then 
DELKEY automatically obtains a temporary write lock. If this write lock cannot 
be obtained return code 131 is generated. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 239 








DELKEY may be used with ADDKEY to change a key's value. Since the record 
will be deleted by DELKEY if the record only has one key it is most important to 
perform the ADDKEY of the new key first. 


To delete a record from the keyed file all its keys must be deleted. Once all a 
record's keys have been deleted it is no longer accessible, and the space it 
occupied will be re-used when a new record is added (using ADDREC). 


Associated Keywords. 
ADDKEY, ADDREC 


240 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


DIM 


Declare array dimensions. Command 


Use. 

In order to allocate memory for an array BASIC must know how many 
dimensions it has, and the maximum permissible value of each one. The DIM 
command allows dimensions to be set explicitly. 

Form. 

DIM list-of: subscripted-variable 

where subscripted-variable is: variable-name (dimension-list) 

and dimension-list is: list-of: integer-expression 

Notes. 


Each integer-expression in the dimension-list sets the maximum value to be 
allowed for the corresponding subscript. The minimum value of each subscript is 
0 or 1 as set in an OPTION BASE command, or 0 by default. 


Array dimensions may be set explicitly in a DIM command, or implicitly when 
the array is first encountered. When an array is declared implicitly the maximum 
value for each subscript is set to 10. 


It is an error to attempt to change the dimensions of an array which has already 
been declared (explicitly or implicitly). 


There is no restriction on the number of subscripts an array may have, other than 
line length and store size! 


Associated Keywords. 
OPTION BASE 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 241 





DIR 





Directory Listing. Command 


Use. 

To print a directory listing to the console. This may be a complete listing, or a 
partial listing depending on the given file names, which may contain ‘wild card’ 
characters. 

Form. 

DIR [list-of: filename] 

Notes. 


If the list of filenames is omitted, then all files on the default drive are listed. If a 
number of filenames is given, then each name is taken in turn and all files 
consistent with the name are listed. The ‘wild card' characters '?' and *' may be 
used in the usual way. 


DIR treats all the rest of the current line as its argument, irrespective of colons or 
single quotes. 


Associated Keywords. 
FILES, FIND$ 


242 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


DISPLAY 


Display contents of file on console. Command 


Use. 

To print a given file on the console. 

Form. 

DISPLAY string-expression 

The string-expression yields a string giving the name of the file to be printed on 
the console. The name may not contain ‘wild card' characters. 

Notes. 


The file specified is read and written directly to the console. Typing Control-C 
will abandon the operation and return to Direct Mode (except in Run-Only 
versions, when Control-C is ignored). 

While the file is being written to the console, typing Control-S will suspend 
output (except in Run-Only versions, when Control-S is ignored). Output may be 
restarted in the usual way (see Section 3.3). 


Tabs and carriage returns are treated in the usual way, and console width is 
enforced. All other characters are sent to the console exactly as read from the 
file, so control characters and characters outside the normal ASCII range may be 
included in the file to produce special console effects. 


Associated Keywords. 
TYPE 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 243 





EDIT 


Edit a program line. Command 
Unavailable in Run Only Versions 


Use. 

To amend individual program lines. 

Form. 

EDIT line-number 

Notes. 

Enters the line editor with the given line as the line to be edited. 


See Chapter 4 for a description of the line editor. 





244 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


END 


End of program. Command 
Use. 

To signal the end of a program, and stop cleanly. 

Form. 

END 


Notes. 


Any number of END commands may appear anywhere in a program, though an 
END is assumed after BASIC has obeyed the last line of a program. 


END closes all files and returns to Direct Mode. 


Associated Keywords. 
STOP 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 245 


EOF 





End of File test. Function 


Use. 
To test if the given file is positioned at end of file. Returns —1 (true) if is at end 
of file. Returns 0 (false) otherwise. 


Form. 
EOF (file-number-expression) 


Notes. 
The file may not be open for Output and may not be a keyed file. 


EOF is most useful with sequential input files. A WHILE NOT EOF loop may be 
used to read up to the end of a file. 


EOF may be used with random files, but must be used with care. EOF does not 
return a valid result before the first GET operation following the OPEN for the 
file. Following a GET, EOF will return: 


— false if the record has ever been written. 


— true if the record read is beyond the highest numbered record ever 
written. 


EOF may, therefore, be used to read sequentially a random file in which all 
records from the first up to the highest numbered have been written at some time. 
EOF will return true once the first record beyond the end of file has been read. A 
WHILE NOT EOF loop preceded by a GET for the first record, and with the GET 
for the next record at the end, would be suitable. 


However, this technique must be used with care under CP/M and MS-DOS 1, 
which allocate disc space in units of 128 bytes. If your record size is not a 
multiple of 128 bytes, EOF may return FALSE spuriously at the end of the file 
because PUTting the highest numbered record in a file also wrote part of the next 
128-byte unit (or units). Furthermore, if you leave some gaps, ie. you do not write 
to all the records in a file, CP/M may report EOF true for these gaps. 


Associated Keywords. 
LOC, LOF 


246 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


ERA 


Erase files. CP/M Command 
Use. 

To erase a file or list of files. 

Form. 

ERA list-of: file-name 

Note. 


This command is only available in versions of BASIC for CP/M type operating 
systems. 


Each file specified is erased. If a file name contains 'wild card’ characters, then 
all matching files are erased. 


ERA takes the rest of the current line as its argument, irrespective of colons or 
single quotes. 


Erasing an open file is not recommended. On multiuser systems this command 
may fail if the file is in use by other users or if the file is locked. 


Associated Keywords. 
KILL 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 247 





ERASE 


Erase arrays. Command 


Use. 

When an array is no longer required ERASE may be used to remove it and 
reclaim the memory it occupies ready for other use. 

Form. 

ERASE list-of: variable-name 

where each variable-name is the name of an array, without any subscript part. 
Notes. 

It is an error to ERASE an array which has not been declared (explicitly or 
implicitly). 

Once an array has been ERASEd it is possible to declare it again with new 
dimensions. 

Associated Keywords. 

DIM 





248 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


ERL 


Error Line Number. Function 


Use. 

ERL may be used in error handling subroutines to discover the number of the line 
being executed in which the error occurred. 

Notes. 

This function may be used in expressions in the usual way. 

Warning. 

If ERL is used in comparison expressions it must be written on the lefthand side 
for RENUM to recognise the righthand side as a line number. If the expression is 
written the other way round, RENUM is unable to find the line number and will 
ignore it — which is likely to cause inconsistencies. 

Associated Keywords. 

ON ERROR, ERR, ERROR, OSERR 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 249 





ERR 


Error Number. Function 


Use. 

ERR may be used in error handling subroutines to discover the number of the 
error which has occurred. 

Notes. 

This function may be used in expressions in the usual way. 


Associated Keywords. 
ON ERROR, ERL, ERROR, OSERR 





250 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


ERROR 


Cause Error action to be taken. Command 
Use. 


Invoke Error Action with a given error number. 

Form. 

ERROR integer-expression 

where the integer-expression must evaluate to a number in the range 1...255. 
Notes. 


If the error number is one already used and recognised by BASIC, the action 
taken is the same as would be taken if such an error had been detected by BASIC. 


Error numbers beyond those recognised by BASIC may be used by the program 
to signal its own errors. Error numbers 200 or greater are not used by BASIC and 
will not be used in future versions. 


In the event of BASIC attempting to print an error message for an error number 
that it does not recognise, the message 'Unknown error’ is produced. 


Associated Keywords. 
ON ERROR, ERR, ERL 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 251 


EXP 


Exponential. Function 


Use. 
Calculate e to the given power, where e is the number whose natural logarithm is 


1 (approx. 2.7182818). 

Form. 

EXP (numeric-expression) 

Notes. 

EXP of numbers much greater than 88 will cause an overflow error. 

EXP of numbers much less than —-88.7 underflows, and yields the value zero. 


While the numeric-expression may be of any numeric type, the argument is 
forced to Single Length before it is processed. EXP returns a Single Length 
result. 

Associated Keywords. 

LOG 





252 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


FETCHKEY$ 


Fetch the current key value. Jetsam Function 
Use. 

Fetch the key value from the key entry at the current position. 

Form. 

FETCHKEYS (file-reference) 

The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 


Notes. 


This function returns the key value of the last key entry found. Unless the 
associated record, or the file, is locked there is no guarantee that this key entry 
still exists. 


Associated Keywords. 
FETCHRANK, FETCHREC 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 253 





FETCHRANK 


Fetch the current key rank. Jetsam Function 
Use. 

Fetch the rank from the key entry at the current position. 

Form. 

FETCHRANK (file-reference) 

The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 


Notes. 


This function returns the rank from the last key entry found. Unless the associated 
record, or the file, is locked there is no guarantee that this key entry still exists. 


Associated Keywords. 
FETCHKEY, FETCHREC 


254 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


FETCHREC 


Fetch the current record number. Jetsam Function 


Use. 


Fetch the record number of the record referred to by the key entry at the current 
position. 


Form. 
FETCHREC (file-reference) 
The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 


Notes. 


If the current position is set this function returns the record number from the key 
entry. Unless the record, or the file, is locked there is no guarantee that this key 
entry still exists. 


If the current position is unset, this function returns zero. 


Associated Keywords. 
FETCHRANK, FETCHKEY$ 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 255 





FIELD 


Define a field layout for a given file. Command 


Use. 
A FIELD command defines a template for records in a file open for random 
access, and associates a string variable with each field. 


Form. 

FIELD file-reference, list-of: field 

where: 

The file-reference gives the file number to which this template applies. The file 
must be open for random access. 

field is: field-size AS string-variable 

where field-size is an integer-expression, value in the range 0...255. The sum of 
all the field-sizes must be less than or equal to the record size. 


Notes. 


Each field in the template is given a size and a string variable is associated with 
it. The fields are mapped onto the record, with the first field corresponding to the 
first few bytes, the second the following bytes, and so on. 


The string variables are effectively pointers into the record buffer. Executing a 
FIELD command neither reads nor writes data, but simply sets the string 
variables to point at the current contents of the buffer. 


Each FIELD statement executed for a given file sets up a separate template for 
the record buffer. There is no restriction on the number of such templates, and 
they will all be valid. 


The number of bytes available to the FIELD command in a keyed file is two 
bytes less than the record length. These reserved bytes cannot be accessed by the 
user or be defined as part of the FIELD template. 


Warning. 


The string variable associated with each field must not be assigned to except by 
using LSET, RSET or MIDS. Any other form of assignment will not write to the 
record buffer, but will create a new string which will not be stored in the random 
record buffer and will break the association of the string variable name with the 
record buffer. 


Associated Keywords. 
OPEN, GET, PUT, LSET, RSET, MID$ 





256 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


FILES 


Directory listing. Command 


Use. 


To print a directory listing to the console. This may be a complete listing, or a 
partial listing depending on a given file name, which may contain ‘wild card’ 
characters. 


Form. 
FILES [file-name-expression] 


The file-name-expression specifies which files are to be listed. If the expression 
is omitted, then all files on the default drive are listed. 


Notes. 


The ‘wild card’ characters '?' and '*' may be used in the string expression to 
specify a number of files in the usual way. 


Associated Keywords. 
DIR, FIND$ 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 257 





FIND$ 





Look for given file. Function 
Use. 

FIND$ looks up the given file and returns its name, if found. 

Form. 

FINDS (file-name-expression[ , ordinal]) 


The file-name-expression gives the name of the file to be searched for. The 
resulting string may contain 'wild card’ characters, which are treated in the usual 
way. 


The ordinal, if present, must be an integer-expression. 


Notes. 


If the file sought is found FIND$ returns a twelve character string containing the 
name of the file, complete with any file attribute bits. (Note that the STRIP$ 
function may be used to remove these attribute bits.) 


If no matching file is found, then a null string is returned. 


The ordinal argument is useful when the file-name-expression contains ‘wild card’ 
characters. If the value of the ordinal is n, then FIND$ looks for the nth matching 
file. If the ordinal is omitted then FIND$ looks for the first matching file. 


Associated Keywords. 
DIR, FILES, UPPER$, STRIP$ 


258 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


FINDDIR$ 


Look for given directory. Function 


Use. 

For Mallard-86 MSDOS 2 version, this function looks for the given directory and 
returns its name, if found. 

Mallard-86 MSDOS 1 version, all CP/M versions and Mallard-80 all return a null 
string. 

Form. 

FINDDIRS (string-expression [, ordinal]) 

where the string-expression yields a file-spec which gives the name of the 
directory to search for. The file-simple may contain 'wild-cards’. 


The ordinal, if present, must be an integer-expression yielding a value in the 
range 1...32767. 

Notes. 

If the directory sought is found, FINDDIR$ returns a twelve character string 
containing the name, dir-simple, of the directory. 

If no matching directory is found then a null string is returned. 


The ordinal argument is useful when the string-expression contains 'wild-cards’. 
If the value of the ordinal is n, then FINDDIR$ looks for the nth matching 
directory. If the ordinal is omitted then 1 is assumed. 


The associated function FINDS cannot be used for searching for directories. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHDIR, MKDIR, RMDIR, CD, MD, CHDIR$, FIND$ 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 259 





FIX 





Fix number to integer. Function 


Use. 


To truncate given value to an integer. Note that this does not convert floating 
point numbers to integer format, but simply removes any fraction part, rounding 
the value toward zero. 


Form. 
FIX (numeric-expression) 


Associated Keywords. 
CINT, INT, ROUND 





260 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


FOR 





FOR loop. Command 


Use. 


Execute a section of a program a given number of times, stepping a control 
variable between a start and an end value. 


Form. 
FOR simple-variable=start TO end [STEP step-size] 


simple-variable is the control variable for the FOR loop, it must be an Integer or 
Single Length, and may not be an array item. 


start is a numeric-expression giving the initial value for the control variable. 
end is a numeric-expression giving the limiting value for the control variable. 


step-size is a numeric-expression giving the value to add to the control variable 
after each iteration. If the step size is omitted, a step of 1 is assumed. Note that 
the step-size may be negative. 


The results of the start, end and step-size-expressions are forced to the same type 
as the control variable. 


Notes. 


The FOR command initiates a FOR loop. The end of the FOR loop is marked by © 
a NEXT command. 


When the FOR command is executed the start, end and step-size expressions are 
evaluated, then the control variable is set to the start value. If the initial value is 
beyond the end value (see below) then the FOR loop is skipped, otherwise the 
loop is entered. When the matching NEXT is found the step size is added to the 
control variable, and control returns to the start of the FOR loop unless the 
control variable is now beyond the end value. 


If the step size is positive (or omitted) the FOR loop terminates when the control 
variable is greater than the end value. If the step size is negative the FOR loop 
terminates when the control variable is less than the end value. 


The NEXT command which matches a given FOR is established statically when 
the FOR is first executed. That is to say that the NEXT which matches the FOR 
depends on the order of statements in the program, quite independently of the 
order of execution. It is not possible, therefore, to have more than one NEXT 
associated with a given FOR. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 261 





FOR loops may be nested, both inside other FOR loops and inside WHILE loops. 


The value of the control variable is defined once the loop has terminated. It is 
permissible to terminate a FOR loop by avoiding the NEXT; the value of the 
control variable is unchanged. 

Care must be exercised if fractional step sizes are used, since the effects of 
rounding may mean that the control variable value can never exactly equal the 
final value. 


Associated Keywords. 
NEXT, WHILE 


262 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


or 


FRE 





Free space measurement. Function 


Use. 


To establish how much free memory remains unused by BASIC. Two forms of 
the function exist, one causes BASIC to ‘garbage collect’ before measuring the 
free space. 


Form. 


FRE (numeric-expression ) 
FRE (string-expression) 


Notes. 


The value of the argument in a FRE is not relevant, so FRE (0) and FRE ("") 
are the recommended forms. 


BASIC maintains a heap in the free memory, in which strings are stored. As the 
heap grows the free space is used up. At the same time areas within the heap area 
may become free, but cannot be reclaimed by BASIC until a ‘garbage collection’ 
is performed. In general BASIC does not ‘garbage collect’ until the heap has 
grown to fill all free memory. 


FRE (0) returns the amount of memory left for the heap to grow into. 


FRE ("") forces BASIC to ‘garbage collect’ so that any unused space within the 
heap is returned to the free area. The result of the expression is then the 
maximum free space available. Note that if there are a large number of strings 
the ‘garbage collection’ may take a noticeable time. 

Associated Keywords. 

MEMORY, CLEAR, HIMEM 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 263 





Oo 


4 


GET 





Get record from random or keyed file. Command 


Use. 
To read a given record from a random file or a keyed data file into the record 
buffer, where it can be processed by the program. 


Form. 


GET file-reference[ , record-number] 
GET file-reference, [record-number] , lock 


The file-reference specifies the file to read from, which must be an open random 
or keyed file. 


For random files: The record-number specifies the record to be read. If no 
number is specified the record following the one in the last GET or PUT is 
assumed — if this is the first GET or PUT then record 1 is read. 

The lock parameter, if present, specifies the record lock to be applied to the 
record before it is read. This parameter may only be present when reading from 
random files. 

For keyed files: The record-number specifies which record from the data file is 
to be read. If the parameter is omitted the record number given by the current 
position is used. 


For Random Files Note. 
An internal pointer is associated with the random record buffer, to allow INPUT # 
et al to read data from the record. A GET operation resets that pointer. 


For Keyed Files Note. 
The record, or the file, must be read or write locked. Only record numbers that 
have been returned by the FETCHREC function should be used. 


For Random Files in Multiuser Versions Note. 

GET releases any outstanding temporary record write lock. See Section 9.3.4 for 
a description of the temporary record write lock mechanism. 

Record locking is only required if the file is open unlocked. If a lock is specified 
then BASIC attempts to gain the lock before reading the record and will report an 
error 69 if the lock cannot be obtained. The record may be locked using the 
LOCK function before the GET is issued. If the record is not locked when GET 
comes to read it BASIC attempts to gain a temporary record write lock. 


Associated Keywords. 
OPEN, FIELD, INPUT #, LINE INPUT #, PUT 


264 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


GOSUB 





Go to Subroutine. Command 
Use. 
To call a given subroutine. 


Form. 

GOSUB line-number 
or GO SUB line-number 

Notes. 


When GOSUB is executed the program jumps to the given line number, 
remembering the position immediately after the GOSUB so that execution may 
continue there when the subroutine returns. 


Subroutines are terminated by a RETURN command. A subroutine may contain 
more than one RETURN command. 


Subroutines may be nested and recurse, to a depth limited only by the stack size. 


Associated Keywords. 
RETURN, ON expression GOSUB 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 265 


or 


GOTO 





Go to line. 
Use. 
Unconditional jump to a given line. 


Form. 


GOTO line-number 
GO TO line-number 


Associated Keywords. 
ON expression GOTO 


266 


Command 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


HEX$ 


Hexadecimal string. Function 


Use. 

To produce a string of hexadecimal digits representing the value of the given 
expression. 

Form. 

HEXS (unsigned-integer-expression| , field-size] ) 

The value of the unsigned-integer-expression is treated as an unsigned 16 bit 


integer, to be converted into a string of hexadecimal characters. See Section 2.10 
for a description of unsigned integer. 


The optional field-size is an integer-expression which gives the minimum size of 
string to be produced, and must yield a value in the range 0...16. 

Notes. 

HEX$ always generates as many characters as are required to represent the 
number (zero generates at least one digit). If the optional field-size is present and 
the string is too short, then the string is filled to length with leading zeros. The 
string is not truncated if it is too long. 

Associated Keywords. 

OCT$, DEC$, STR$ 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 267 





HIMEM 


Return address of highest byte in memory Function 
used by BASIC. 


Use. 


The amount of memory used by BASIC may be altered by the MEMORY and 
CLEAR commands. The built-in HIMEM function may be used to establish the 


current memory use. 

Form. 

HIMEM 

Notes. 

HIMEM returns a Single Length value giving the address of the highest byte in 
memory used by BASIC. 

Associated Keywords. 

CLEAR, MEMORY, FRE 


268 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


or 


IF 





Command 


Use. 
To conditionally execute statements. 


Form: 
IF logical-expression THEN option-part [ELSE option-part] 
IF logical-expression GOTO line-number [ELSE option-part] 
where option-part is: statement(s) 
or: line-number 
and statement(s) is one or more statements on the same line as the IF (separated 
by colons). 
Notes. 


The logical-expression is evaluated and if the result is non-zero then the THEN or 
GOTO option is executed. Otherwise the THEN or GOTO option is skipped, 
until either end of line or a matching ELSE is found. In the latter case the ELSE 
option is executed. 


IF statements may be nested to any depth, limited only by the line length. ELSE 
parts are associated with the innermost IF which does not already have an ELSE 
part. 


THEN line-number and ELSE line-number are equivalent to THEN GOTO line- 
number and ELSE GOTO line-number, respectively. 


The IF command is terminated by end of line. It is not possible to have further 
statements independent of the IF later on the same line. 


Associated Keywords. 
WHILE 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 269 





INKEY$ 


Input key from keyboard. Function 


Use. 


Input next key, if any, from keyboard (console input). Note that any character 
input is not reflected to the console output. 


Form. 
INKEYS 


Notes. 


If there is a character pending then INKEY$ returns it (as a one character string). 
If no characters are pending INKEY$ returns an empty string. 


Except for Control-C and Control-S, all characters are passed as read to the 
program, without reflecting them to the console. Control-C halts the program in 
the usual way. Control-S suspends the execution of the program in the usual way. 
It is not possible, therefore, for a program to give anomalous results depending on 
the exact moment that these keys are pressed. 


OPTION RUN modifies the handling of Control-C and Control-S. While 
OPTION RUN is in force all versions of BASIC treat these characters as ordinary 
characters, and INKEY$ will pass them to the program. 


To be consistent with Full versions, Run Only versions usually ignore both 
Control-C and Control-S, but will pass them to the program if OPTION RUN is 
in force. 

Associated Keywords. 

INPUT$, OPTION RUN, OPTION STOP 





270 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


INP. INPW 





Input from I/O port. Function 
Use. 

Input value from the given I/O port. 

Form. 


INP (port-number ) 
INPW (port-number ) 


For Mallard-80 the port-number is an integer-expression which must yield a 
value in the range 0...255. 


For Mallard-86 the port-number is an address-expression 


Notes. 
INP reads a byte from the given I/O port. 
INPW reads a word from the given I/O port. INPW is illegal in Mallard-80. 


Associated Keywords. 
OUT, OUTW, WAIT, WAITW 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 271 


or 


INPUT 


Input data from console. Command 


Use. 
To prompt the operator and read data from the console. 


Form. 

INPUT [; ][quoted-string ; ] list-of:variable 

INPUT [; ][quoted-string , ] list-of:variable 

where the quoted-string is an optional prompt string. 


Notes. 

The default prompt is a question mark. If an explicit prompt string is given then a 
question mark is appended to it if the first form is used (with a semicolon after the 
prompt string), but not if the second form is used. 


When the INPUT command is executed the prompt is issued, and a line is read 
from the console. The line input is treated as a list of items, and BASIC attempts 
to assign the value of one item to each variable in the list in turn, checking that 
the item is compatible with the variable. The line read takes the form: 


list-of: item 
where each item may be one of: 
a numeric-value, which may be surrounded by white-space, which is ignored. 


a quoted-string, which may be surrounded by white-space, which is ignored. The 
trailing double quotes may be omitted if the string is the last object on the line. 


an unquoted-string, which may be surrounded by white-space, which is ignored. 
An unquoted-string is between 0 and 255 characters terminated by comma or 
carriage return. 


If there are the right number of items on the line, and their types are all 
compatible with the corresponding variable, then the values of the items are 
assigned to the variables. 


If there are too few or too many items, or if an item is not compatible with the 
corresponding variable, then the message "?Redo from start’ is issued, and the 
INPUT command restarted (so the prompt is repeated). None of the variables in 
the INPUT statement will have been affected. 


The optional semicolon immediately after the INPUT keyword stops BASIC from 
reflecting the carriage return typed at the end of the input line. This means that 
the cursor is left at the end of the text just entered. 


272 Mallard BASIC: Reference 





When fetching a line for INPUT, Simple Line Input is used (see Section 4.1). 


Values are assigned to the variables in the order they appear in the INPUT 
statement. A variable may be an item in an array. If any variable which appears 
earlier in the INPUT statement also appears in a subscript expression, then the 
newly assigned value will be used when establishing the array item to be assigned 
to. (If this feature is to be exploited the subscript expression must evaluate to a 
valid subscript both before and after the variables in question have been affected 
by the INPUT.) 


Associated Keywords. 
LINE INPUT, DATA, READ, INPUT #, LINE INPUT #, INKEY$, INPUTS 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 273 





INPUT # 


Input data from file. Command 


Use. 
To read data from sequential files, or the random record buffer. 


Form. 
INPUT #file-number-expression , list-of: variable 


The file-number-expression specifies the file to read from. If the file is open for 
random access, then the data is read from the record buffer. 


The list-of: variable specifies where to read data to and what type of data is to be 
read. 


Notes. 


BASIC attempts to read one item from the file for each variable in the list of 
variables. Each item must be compatible with the variable to which its value is to 
be assigned. Each item in the file may be one of: 


a numeric-value, which may be preceded by white-space which is ignored. A 
numeric item is terminated by white-space, comma, carriage return or end of file. 
Trailing white-space is ignored. Any following comma or carriage return is 
ignored. 

a quoted-string, which may be preceded by white-space, which is ignored. All 
characters after the leading double quotes, including carriage returns and 
linefeeds, up to the trailing double quotes form the string. The string is 
terminated by double quotes or end of file. After the trailing double quotes, 
trailing white-space is ignored. Any following comma or carriage return is 
ignored. 

an unquoted-string, which may be preceded by white-space, which is ignored. An 
unquoted-string item is terminated by a comma, carriage return or end of file. 


(Nulls are ignored throughout. Carriage return immediately followed by Line 
Feed is treated as a carriage return, and vice versa. Strings are limited to 255 
characters, and terminate automatically after the 255th.) 


If the file is open for random access, then INPUT # reads from the record buffer, 
and will fail (Error 50) if an attempt is made to read beyond the end of the buffer. 
An internal pointer is associated with the record, to allow separate INPUT # 
commands to read along the record. This pointer is reset to the beginning of the 
buffer each time a record is read (by GET). 


Associated Keywords. 


INPUT #, LINE INPUT, DATA, READ, LINE INPUT #, INKEY$, INPUT$, 
GET 
274 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


INPUT$ 


Input fixed length string. Function 


Use. 
To input a fixed number of characters either from the keyboard or from a file. 


Form. 
INPUTS (integer-expression|[ , [#]file-number-expression] ) 


The integer-expression gives the number of characters to be read, and must yield 
a value in the range 1...255. 


The file-number-expression gives the number of the file from which to read. The 
file must be open for Random or Input Access. If the file number part is omitted, 
INPUTS reads from the console. 


Notes. 

When reading from the console all characters, except for Control-C and 
Control-S, are included in the string as read, without reflecting them to the 
console. Control-C halts the program in the usual way. Control-S suspends the 
execution of the program in the usual way. It is not possible, therefore, for a 
program to give anomalous results depending on the exact moment that these 
keys are pressed. 


OPTION RUN modifies the handling of Control-C and Control-S. While 
OPTION RUN is in force, BASIC treats these as ordinary characters, and 
INPUT$ will pass them to the program. 


When reading from a file open for Random Access it is an error to attempt to read 
beyond the end of the current record. 


When reading from a random access or keyed file no special notice is taken of the 
character Control-Z. 


To be consistent with Full versions Run Only versions usually ignore both 
Control-C and Control-S, but will pass them to the program if OPTION RUN is 
in force. 


Associated Keywords. 
INKEY$, INPUT #, OPTION RUN, OPTION STOP 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 275 





INSTR 


Search for substring in string. Function 


Use. 

To search from a given point in a given string for the first occurrence of another 
given string. 

Form. 

INSTR ([integer-expression, ]searched-string , searched-for-string) 

The integer-expression gives the character position within the searched-string at 


which to start searching, and must yield a value in the range 1...255. If omitted 
then the search starts at the first character of the searched string. 


The searched-string is a string-expression giving the string to be searched along. 
The searched-for-string is a string-expression giving the string to search for. 


Notes. 

If the searched-for-string is found, INSTR returns the position within the 
searched-string of the start of the first occurrence of the searched-for-string. 
Otherwise INSTR returns zero. 


If there are no characters in the searched-string from the given (or default) 
Starting position, then INSTR always returns zero. 


If the searched-for-string is null, then it is immediately found, unless the previous 
rule applies. 





276 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


INT 





Number to integer. Function 


Use. 


To round a given value to the nearest smaller integer (round toward minus 
infinity). Note that this does not convert floating point numbers to integer format, 
but simply removes any fraction part. 


(For positive numbers this is equivalent to FIX. For negative numbers the value 
returned is one less than FIX would return, unless the value was already integral.) 


Form. 
INT (numeric-expression) 


Associated Keywords. 
CINT, FIX, ROUND 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 277 


KILL 


Kill file. Command 
Use. 

To erase a file. 

Form. 

KILL file-name-expression 

The file-name-expression gives the name of the file to be erased. 

Notes. 


If the file-name-expression contains ‘wild card’ characters, then all matching files 
are erased. 


Erasing an open file is not recommended. On multiuser systems this command 
may fail if the file is in use by other users or if the file is locked. 


Associated Keywords. 
ERA 


278 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


LEFTS 





Extract lefthand part of string. Function 
Use. 


To extract a given number of characters from the lefthand end of a given string. 
Form. 

LEFTS (string-expression, integer-expression) 

The string-expression gives the string from which to extract characters. 


The integer-expression gives how many characters to extract, and must yield a 
value in the range 0...255. 


Notes. 


If the given string is shorter than the required length, then the entire string is 
returned. Otherwise the lefthand end of the string is returned, giving a string of 
the required length. 


Associated Keywords. 
MID$, RIGHT$ 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 279 





LEN 





Determine length of string. Function 
Use. 

To determine the length of a given string. 

Form. 

LEN (string-expression) 


Notes. 
LEN returns an integer in the range 0...255. 0 indicates that the string is null. 


All characters in the string are counted, including any non-printing ones. 





280 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


LET 





Preface an assignment. Command 


Use. 

The LET command is not very useful, it is really a hangover from the earliest 
BASICs, and may be ignored. 

Form. 

LET variable=expression 

Notes. 

The expression is evaluated and the resulting value assigned to the variable, 
unless the two are incompatible. 

The LET keyword is, in fact, wholly redundant (except in the Run Only Special 
Direct Mode). 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 281 





or 


LINE INPUT 


Input complete line from console. Command 


Use. 
To prompt the operator and read a complete line of text from the console to a 
given string variable. 


Form. 
LINE INPUT [; ][prompt; ]string-variable 
LINE INPUT [;][prompt, ]string-variable 


The prompt, if present, must be a quoted-string. 

The string-variable gives the name of the variable to which to assign the string 
created. 

Notes. 

The two forms are equivalent. 


When the LINE INPUT command is executed the prompt, if any, is issued, and a 
line is read from the console and assigned to the given string. The line is 
terminated by carriage return (or after 255 characters, whichever is the sooner). 


If a semi-colon immediately follows the LINE INPUT then BASIC will not 
reflect the carriage return typed at the end of the input line. This means that the 
cursor is left at the end of the text just entered. 


When fetching a line for LINE INPUT Simple Line Input is used (see 
Section 4.1). 


Associated Keywords. 
DATA, READ, INPUT, INPUT #, LINE INPUT #, INKEY$, INPUTS 


282 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


LINE INPUT # 


Input complete line from file. Command 


Use. 

To read a complete line from a given file to a given string. 

Form. 

LINE INPUT #file-number-expression, string-variable 

Notes. 

The file must be open for Input or Random Access. 

If the file is open for random access, then LINE INPUT # reads from the record 
buffer, and will fail (Error 50) if an attempt is made to read beyond the end of the 
buffer. An internal pointer is associated with the record, to allow separate LINE 
INPUT # commands to read along the record. This pointer is reset to the 
beginning of the buffer each time a record is read (by GET). 

Associated Keywords. 

DATA, READ, INPUT, INPUT #, LINE INPUT, INKEY$, INPUTS 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 283 


LIST _ LLIST 


List program. Command 
Unavailable in Run Only versions 

Use. 

To list the current program. Part or all of the program may be listed. LIST sends 

its output to the console. LLIST sends its output to the line printer. 

Form. 


LIST [line-number-range] 
LLIST /[line-number-range] 


The line number range defines which lines of the program to list. If it is omitted 
then all the program is listed. 


Notes. 
BASIC returns to Direct Mode after obeying a LIST or LLIST command. 


Typing Control-C will abandon the listing and return to Direct Mode. 





284 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


LOAD 





Load a program into memory. Command 


Use. 

To read a program from disc into memory, replacing any existing program. The 
program may optionally be run immediately. 

Form. 

LOAD string-expression[ , R] 

The string-expression gives the name of the file from which to read the program. 
If no file type extension is given .BAS is assumed. 

Notes. 

The optional , R indicates that the program is to be run immediately it is loaded. 


Any existing program, user functions and variables are deleted from memory. 
DEFINT, DEFSNG, DEFDBL, DEFSTR and OPTION BASE settings are reset. 
Unless the , R option is specified all files are closed. 

In Run Only versions the ,R is required, otherwise BASIC will terminate and 
return to system level after loading the given program. 

Associated Keywords. 

SAVE, RUN, MERGE, CHAIN, CHAIN MERGE 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 285 


LOC 


Current Location in file. Function 


Use. 
To establish the current record number in a given file. 


Form. 


LOC (file-number-expression) 
where file-number-expression gives the number of a file which is open (for any 
form of access). 


Notes. 


If the file is open for Random Access LOC returns the record number of the 
record referenced in the last PUT or GET operation. If there have been no PUT 
or GET operations since the file was opened then 0 is returned. 


If the file is open for Input or Output Access then LOC returns the number of at 
byte records read or written. 


LOC may not be used with keyed files. 


Associated Keywords. 
LOF, EOF 





286 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


LOCK 


Change a record lock. Jetsam Function 


Use. 
To change or clear a record lock. 


Form. 

LOCK (file-reference , lock, record-number) 

The file-reference gives the file number of an open random or keyed file. 

The /ock parameter specifies what record lock is to be applied to the given record. 


The record-number specifies which record from the data file is to have its lock 
changed. 


Return codes. 


0 Success unqualified. 

130 Failure _ the file is read locked by another user. 

132 Failure could not read lock the record as requested. 
133 Failure could not write lock the record as requested. 


Notes. 


For keyed files only record numbers that have been returned by the FETCHREC 
function should be used. When the record was found, using one of the various 
SEEK functions, a record lock will have been applied to the record. The LOCK 
function allows the type of lock to be changed or released. The record must 
already be read or write locked. 


For random files the LOCK function may be used at any time to set, change or 
release locks on any existing record in the file. The record need not already be 
locked. Record locks may also be affected by GET and PUT commands. The 
LOCK function interacts with the temporary record write lock mechanism — see 
Section 9.3.4. 


Associated Keywords. 


GET, PUT, SEEKRANK, SEEKKEY, SEEKREC, SEEKSET, SEEKNEXT, 
SEEKPREV 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 287 


LOF 


Length of file. Function 


Use. 

To give some indication of the length of a given file. 

Form. 

LOF (file-number-expression) 

where file-number-expression gives the number of a file which is open (for any 
form of access). 

Notes. 


The value returned gives some indication of the length of the file, the exact value 
returned depends on the underlying operating system. LOF will never return a 
zero value unless the file is empty. 


LOF used with keyed files returns the length of the data file. 


Associated Keywords. 
LOC, EOF 


288 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


LOG 





Natural logarithm. Function 
Use. 

To calculate natural logarithms. 

Form. 

LOG (numeric-expression) 

where the result of the numeric-expression must be greater than zero. 

Notes. 


While the numeric-expression may be of any numeric type, the argument is 
forced to Single Length before it is processed. LOG returns a Single Length 
result. 


Associated Keywords. 
EXP, LOG10 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 289 


LOG10 


Logarithm, base 10. Function 
Use. 


To calculate logarithms to base 10. 


Form. 

LOG10 (numeric-expression) 

where the result of the numeric-expression must be greater than zero. 
Notes. 


While the numeric-expression may be of any numeric type, the argument is 
forced to Single Length before it is processed. LOG10 returns a Single Length 
result. 


Associated Keywords. 
EXP, LOG 


290 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


LOWER$ 


Convert string to lower case. Function 


Use. 

To create a new string which is a copy of another, with all upper case alphabetic 
characters converted to lower case equivalents. 

Form. 

LOWERS (string-expression) 

Notes. 

The result of the string-expression is returned, with any characters in the range 
A...Z converted to the equivalent character in the range a... z. 

Associated Keywords, 

UPPER$ 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 291 


LPOS 


Line printer position. Function 
Use. 


To establish the current print position on the line printer. 
Form. 


LPOS (numeric-expression) 
where the numeric-expression is a dummy argument, so LPOS(0) is the 
recommended form. 
Notes. 
LPOS returns a logical position on the line printer, which may bear no relation 
whatsoever to the current position of the print head! 
In calculating the logical position all non-printing characters (those with values 
< 32) are not counted, except for: 

— Backspace (value 8), which counts as —1 unless the position is one. 

— Tab (value 9), which expands to spaces, each of which is counted. (Tab 


positions eight characters apart all the way across the printer are implicitly 
defined.) 


— Carriage return (value 13), which sets the position to one. 


The position is also affected by carriage returns inserted by BASIC if the logical 
position exceeds the width of the printer, as set by WIDTH LPRINT. 


If the width is set infinite (by WIDTH LPRINT 255) then the logical position will 
grow to 255, but no further. 


Associated Keywords. 
WIDTH LPRINT, POS 


292 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


LPRINT 


Print to the Line Printer. 


See PRINT, reading Line Printer for Console throughout. 


Associated Keywords. 
LPOS, PRINT 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Command 


293 





LSET 


Set one string to another, left justified. Command 


Use. 

To replace the contents of one string by another, filling with spaces on the right to 
the same length as the original contents. 

Form. 

LSET string-variable = string-expression 


Notes. 


The string-expression is evaluated and then forced to the same length as the 
current value of the given string-variable — either by padding with spaces at the 
righthand end, or by discarding characters from the righthand end. The result 
replaces the original contents of the string-variable. 


LSET is particularly useful for setting new values into fields of a random record. 


Associated Keywords. 
FIELD, RSET, MID$, MKI$, MKS$, MKD$ 


294 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


MAX 


Determine maximum value. 

Use. 

To determine the maximum of a number of values. 
Form. 

MAX (list-of: numeric-expression) 

Notes. 


MAX returns the value of the largest of the numeric-expression(s). 


Associated Keywords. 
MIN 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Function 


295 





MD 





Make a new directory. Command 


Use. 


For Mallard-86 MSDOS 2 version, this makes a new directory on the specified, 
or default drive. 


Mallard-86 MSDOS 1 version, all CP/M versions and Mallard-80 all ignore this 
command. 


Form. 


MD dir-name 
where the last dir-simple of the dir-name specifies the directory to make. 


Notes. 
The directory must not already exist. 


This command takes the rest of the current line as its argument, irrespective of 
colons or single quotes. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHDIR, RMDIR, MKDIR, CD, RD, CHDIR$, FINDDIR$ 


296 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


0) 
or 
or 


— 


MEMORY 


Reset BASIC memory parameters. Command 


Use. 


To change the amount of memory used by BASIC, the maximum number of files 
and the maximum random record size. 


Form. 


MEMORY high-memory 

MEMORY [high-memory] , stack-size 

MEMORY [high-memory] , [stack-size] , number-of-files 

MEMORY [high-memory] , [stack-size] , [aumber-of-files] , seeasihianil " 
engt 


High-memory is an address-expression which gives the address of the highest 
byte in memory which may be used by BASIC. If omitted the current setting is 
retained. 

Stack-size is an address-expression, which gives the number of bytes BASIC 
should use for its stack. If omitted the current setting is retained. If present, the 
expression must yield a value of at least 256. 

Number-of-files is an address-expression which gives the maximum number of 
files that may be handled at once. If omitted the current setting is retained. 
Maximum-record-length is an address-expression which specifies the maximum 
random record size. If omitted the current setting is retained. 

Notes. 

The syntax means that it is only necessary to give values for those settings which 
are to be changed. 

Changing the stack size causes BASIC to forget any active FOR, WHILE or 
GOSUB commands. 


Reducing the maximum number of files automatically closes any files associated 
with file numbers greater than the new maximum. 


Changing the maximum random record size automatically closes all active files. 
Keyed files closed this way are not marked consistent, so should be explicitly 
CLOSEd beforehand. 


BASIC's stack is used during expression evaluation and to hold information for 
FOR and WHILE loops and for GOSUB returns. The default size of 512 bytes 
should be adequate for most programs, unless extremely deeply nested FOR or 
WHILE loops or GOSUBs are used. 


Associated Keywords. 
CLEAR, HIMEM, OPEN, FRE 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 297 





MERGE 


Merge program from disc into current program. Command 
Unavailable in Run Only versions 
Use. 


To add the contents of a file to the current program in memory. 


Form. 

MERGE String-expression 

The string-expression yields the name of the file to be read. If no type extension 
is given .BAS is assumed. 

Notes. 

MERGE has the following effects on the current environment: 


— Discards all variables 

— All User Functions are forgotten. 

— ON ERROR GOTO is turned off. 

— All open files are retained. 

— RESTORE action is taken. 

— OPTION BASE, DEFINT, DEFSNG, DEFDBL and DEFSTR settings 
are reset. 


During a MERGE operation a line in the new program with the same number as 
an existing line will replace the existing line. 


BASIC returns to Direct Mode after executing a MERGE command. 


If a protected program is MERGEd with an unprotected program, the result is a 
protected program. 


Associated Keywords. 
LOAD, CHAIN MERGE, SAVE, CHAIN, RUN 


298 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


MID$ 


Replace part of a string. Command 
Return a part of a string. Function 
Use. 


MID$ specifies part of a string (a sub-string) which can be used either as the 
destination of an assignment (MID$ as a Command) or as an argument in a string 
expression (MID$ as a Function). 


Form. 
MIDS (string, start-position|[ , sub-string-length]) 


For MID$ as a Command string must be a string-variable, part of which is to be 
altered. 


For MIDS as a Function string is a string-expression, part of which will be 
returned as the function’s value. 


The start-position is an integer-expression which specifies the character in string 
which is to be the first character of the sub-string. The integer-expression must 
yield a value in the range 1 to 255. 


The sub-string-length is an integer-expression which specifies the length of the 
sub-string. If omitted, or greater than the number of characters after the start- 
position, the sub-string extends to the end of the original string. The integer- 
expression must yield a value in the range 0...255. 


Notes. 


The sub-string specified in MID$ is defined by a starting character position and a 
length. The first character of the original string is at position 1. The length 
defaults to all characters after the starting position of the sub-string. If the 
starting position specified is beyond the end of the string, the sub-string is null. 
The sub-string cannot extend beyond the end of the original string, so the 
effective length of the sub-string may be less than the specified length. 


When MID$ is used as a Command it appears on the lefthand side of an 
assignment. On the righthand side must be a string-expression. The sub-string 
specified by the MID$ is replaced by the value of the string-expression. If the 
string-expression yields a string that is shorter than the sub-string, then the extra 
characters in the sub-string are unaffected. If the string-expression yields a string 
that is longer than the sub-string, then the excess characters are discarded. 


Associated Keyword. 
LSET, RSET, LEFT$, RIGHT$, FIELD 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 299 





MIN 


Determine minimum value. Function 


Use. 

To determine the minimum of a number of values. 

Form. 

MIN (list-of: numeric-expression) 

Notes. 

MIN returns the value of the smallest of the numeric-expression(s). 


Associated Keywords. 
MAX 





300 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


MKD$ 


Make Double Length String. Function 


Use. 

To convert a Double Length value into a eight byte string, so that the value may 
be stored in that form. This is particularly useful for storing Double Length 
values in random records. 

Form. 

MKDS (numeric-expression) 

Notes. 

If the expression does not yield a Double Length result, then it is converted to 
Double Length. 


It is not recommended that the string be processed in any way, other than to 
assign it to another string. The function CVD converts the string back to a 
Double Length value. 


This function does not perform any binary to decimal conversion, so the string is 
an exact representation of the Double Length value. 


Associated Keywords. 
CVD, MKI$, MKS$ 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 301 





MKDIR 


Make a new directory. Command 


Use. 


For Mallard-86 MSDOS 2 version, this makes a new directory on the specified, 
or default drive. 


Mallard-86 MSDOS 1 version, all CP/M versions and Mallard-80 all ignore this 
command. 

Form. 

MKDIR String-expression 

where the string-expression yields a dir-name, the last dir-simple of which 
specifies the directory to make. 

Notes. 

The directory must not already exist. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHDIR, RMDIR, CD, MD, RD, CHDIR$, FINDDIR$ 





302 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


MKI$ 





Make Integer String. Function 


Use. 


To convert an Integer value into a two byte string, so that the value may be stored 
in that form. This is particularly useful for storing Integer values in random 
records. 


Form. 

MKIS (numeric-expression) 

Notes. 

If the expression does not yield an Integer result, then it is rounded to Integer. 


It is not recommended that the string be processed in any way, other than to 
assign it to another string. The function CVI converts the string back to an 
Integer value. 


This function does not perform any binary to decimal conversion. 


MKIK$ and MKUKS$ are similar functions which produce two byte strings 
suitable for use as, or in, Jetsam keys. The string produced by MKI$ does not 
sort correctly. 


Associated Keywords. 
CVI, MKS$, MKD$ 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 303 





MKIK$ 





Make Integer Key String. Function 


Use. 

To convert an Integer value into a two byte string suitable for use as a Jetsam key, 
or as part of one. 

Form. 

MKIKS (numeric-expression) 

Notes. 

If the expression does not yield an Integer result, then it is rounded to Integer. 


It is not recommended that the string be processed in any way, other than to 
assign it to another string. The function CVIK converts the string back to an 
Integer value. 


This function does not perform any binary to decimal conversion. 


MKIK$ should be used to create strings to be used as Jetsam keys for integer 
values in the range —32768...32767. There are advantages to keeping Jetsam keys 
as short as possible, and this function produces a compact representation for the 
key. The function MKUK$ should be used for integer values in the range 
0...65535. 


The function MKI$ produces a similar sort of string, but not one which will sort 
correctly if used as, or in, a Jetsam key. 


Associated Keywords. 
CVIK, MKI$, MKUK$ 


304 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


MKS$ 


Make Single Length String. Function 


Use. 

To convert a Single Length value into a four byte string, so that the value may be 
stored in that form. This is particularly useful for storing Single Length values in 
random records. 

Form. 

MKSS (numeric-expression) 

Notes. 

If the expression does not yield a Single Length result, then it is converted to 
Single Length. 


It is not recommended that the string be processed in any way, other than to 
assign it to another string. The function CVS converts the string back to a Single 
Length value. 


This function does not perform any binary to decimal conversion, so the string is 
an exact representation of the Single Length value. 


Associated Keywords. 
CVS, MKI$, MKD$ 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 305 





MKUK$ 


Make Unsigned Integer Key String. Function 


Use. 

To convert an Unsigned Integer value into a two byte string suitable for use as a 
Jetsam key, or as part of one. 

Form. 

MKUKS (numeric-expression) 

Notes. 

If the expression does not yield an Integer result, then it is rounded to Integer. 

It is not recommended that the string be processed in any way, other than to 


assign it to another string. The function CVUK converts the string back to a 
numeric value. 


This function does not perform any binary to decimal conversion. 


MKUKS$ should be used to create strings to be used as Jetsam keys for integer 
values in the range 0...65535. There are advantages to keeping Jetsam keys as 
short as possible, and this function produces a compact representation for the key. 
The function MKIK$ should be used for integer values in the range 
—32768...32767. 


The function MKI$ produces a similar sort of string, but not one which will sort 
correctly if used as, or in, a Jetsam key. 


Associated Keywords. 
CVUK, MKIS$, MKIK$ 


306 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


NAME 


Rename disc file. Command 
Form. 
NAME file-name-expression AS file-name-expression 


The first file-name-expression gives the name of the file whose name is to be 
changed. 


The second file-name-expression gives the new name for the file. 


Notes. 
The file must exist. No file with the new name may exist. 


Renaming an open file is not recommended. On multiuser systems this command 
may fail if the file is in use by other users or if the file is locked. 


Associated Keywords. 
REN 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 307 





NEW 





Prepare to enter new program. Command 


Use. 


Unavailable in Run Only versions 


Before starting a new program NEW may be used to completely clear the current 
contents of memory. 


Form. 


NEW 


Notes. 


As well as deleting the program in memory, the following are affected: 


All variables are discarded. 

All User Functions are forgotten. 

ON ERROR GOTO is turned off. 

All files are closed. 

OPTION BASE, DEFINT, DEFSNG, DEFDBL and DEFSTR setiings 
are reset. 

TRON is turned off. 


BASIC always returns to Direct Mode after a NEW is executed. 


308 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


NEXT 


Step FOR control variable to next value. Command 


Use. 

A NEXT marks the end of a FOR loop. The NEXT command may be 
anonymous, or may refer to its matching FOR. 

Form. 

NEXT [list-of: variable] 

where: NEXT variable, list-of: variable 

is equivalent to: NEXT variable: NEXT list-of: variable 

Notes. 


A NEXT command defines the end of a FOR loop. The way in which FOR and 
NEXT are tied together is described under FOR. When a NEXT command is 
encountered BASIC knows which (if any) FOR it must be associated with. If the 
NEXT is followed by a variable name, then that name must be the same as the 
name of the control variable in the matching FOR command. 


It is an error to execute a NEXT which is not associated with an active FOR. 


Associated Keywords. 
FOR 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 309 





OCT$ 





Octal string. . Function 


Use. 
To produce a string of octal digits representing the value of the given expression. 


Form. 
OCTS (unsigned-integer-expression| , field-size] ) 
The value of the unsigned-integer-expression is treated as an unsigned 16 bit 


integer, to be converted into a string of octal characters. See Section 2.10 for a 
description of unsigned integer. 


The optional field-size is an integer-expression which gives the minimum size of 
string to be produced, and must yield a value in the range 0...16. 


Notes. 


OCT$ always generates as many characters as are required to represent the 
number (zero generates at least one digit). If the optional field-size parameter is 
present and the string is too short, then the string is filled to length with leading 
zeros. The string is not truncated if it is too long. 


Associated Keywords. 
HEX$, DEC$, STR$ 


310 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


ON expression GOSUB/GOTO 





Computed GOSUB & GOTO. Command 


Use. 

To choose one of a number of subroutines to call or a number of lines to jump to, 
depending on the result of an expression. 

Form. 

ON integer-expression GOSUB list-of: line-number 

ON integer-expression GOTO list-of: line-number 

The integer-expression must yield a value in the range 0...255. 


Notes. 


The result of the integer-expression selects a line number from the list: 1 selects 
the 1st, 2 the 2nd, and so on. The subroutine starting at the selected line number 
is called, or the selected line number is jumped to. Zero, or any result greater 
than the number of line numbers in the list, will do nothing. 


Null line number entries in the list are legal. Selecting a null entry is not 
(Error 2). 


Associated Keywords. 
GOTO, GOSUB 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 311 


ON ERROR GOTO 


Set Error Trap. Command 


Use. 

When BASIC detects an error while obeying a command it can either take the 
default action, which is to generate an error message and return to Direct Mode, 
or it can invoke an error handling subroutine in the program. ON ERROR GOTO 
sets BASIC into one of these states. 


Forms, 


ON ERROR GOTO line-number 
ON ERROR GOTO 0 


The line-number specifies the line to which control is to be transferred in the 
event of an error. 


Notes. 
The form ON ERROR GOTO line-number enables error trapping. ON ERROR 


GOTO 0 disables error trapping — note the special effect of this during error 
processing, see below. 


If an error occurs in Program Mode while error trapping is enabled control is 
transferred to the line number specified in the ON ERROR GOTO command. 
BASIC is now in Error Processing Mode. The variables ERR and ERL are set to 
indicate which error has occurred, and which line it occurred in. 


ON ERROR GOTO 0 in Error Processing Mode not only disables error trapping, 
but also causes BASIC to take the default error action for the error that was 
trapped. Error processing routines may, therefore, cope with those errors for 
which they are competent and invoke the default action for the rest. 


If an error is detected during Error Processing Mode BASIC immediately takes 
the default action. 
The RESUME command is only legal during Error Processing Mode, and allows 
the program to resume execution in one of three ways: 

— at the statement in which the error occurred 

— at the statement after the one in which the error occurred 

— ata specified line number 


Associated Keywords. 
ERR, ERL, RESUME 





312 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


10) 


z 


OPEN 





Open file. Command 
Extended in Jetsam Versions 


Use. 

For random and sequential files, to open a disc file and associate it with a file 
number, so that the file may be accessed. 

For keyed files, to open both the index and data files for keyed index access and 
associate them with a file number for keyed access. 


Form — for Random and Sequential Files. 


OPEN mode, file-reference , filename-expression| , record-length] 
OPEN mode, file-reference , filename-expression , [record-length] , lock 


Notes. 


Mode is a string-expression specifying the mode of access to the file. The first 
character of the resulting string must be one of: 


I — for Sequential Input 
oO — for Sequential Output 
R — for Random access 


The file-reference gives the file number with which the file is to be associated, 
and by which it will be referenced. It is an error (Error 55) to attempt to use a file 
number which is currently in use. 


The filename-expression gives the name of the file to be opened. 


A record-length may be specified if the mode is "R". record-length is an integer 
-expression, which must yield a value in the range 1...max. max is set by CLEAR 
and MEMORY command, and when BASIC is first loaded (default value 128). If 
no record-length is specified, 128 is assumed. 


If a lock parameter is present it specifies the file lock to be applied when the file 
is open. On single user systems this parameter has no effect. On multiuser 
systems this parameter over-rides the default file lock. 


Note - for Random and Sequential Files. 
When opening a file for input the file must exist. 


When opening a file for output any existing file of the same name is immediately 
erased. A new file of the required name is created. 


When opening a file for random access the file is created if it does not already 
exist. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 313 





oO 


1 


Note — for Multiuser Random and Sequential File Locks. 
On multiuser systems if no lock parameter is given BASIC assumes a default 
lock, depending on the open mode. If the lock parameter is present the type of 
lock is restricted, also depending on the open mode. Thus: 
— Input files may only be read or write locked, the default is read locked. 
(Write locking gives exclusive access to the file; it may not be written to.) 
— Output files may only be write locked and the default is write locked. 
— Random files may have any lock applied, the default is write locked. 


If BASIC cannot achieve the required file lock the OPEN fails and an error 73 is 
reported. 
Form — for Keyed Files. 


OPEN "K", file-reference, data-filename, index-filename, 
lock[ , record-length-variable] 

OPEN "K", file-reference, data-filename, index-filename, 
lock[ , record-length-variable], user-string-variable 


The file-reference gives the file number on which to open the keyed file. 


The data-filename is a filename-expression giving the name of the data file to be 
opened. 


The index-filename is a filename-expression giving the name of the index file to 
be opened. 


The lock specified is applied to the keyed file when it is opened. 


The record-length-variable, if present, is a numeric-variable which is set to the 
keyed file's record length (as specified when the file was created). 


The user-string-variable, if present, is a string-variable which is set to the user 
string specified when the file was created. 


Note — for Keyed Files. 
The open may fail in a number of ways: 
— error 53: if either file does not exist. 
— error 73: if the required file lock cannot be obtained. 
— error 113: if either file was not created using a CREATE command (ie. the 
file is not recognised by Jetsam). 
— error 115: the files are not consistent (ie. the keyed file was not closed 
properly the last time it was modified). 
The current position is unset. 
Associated Keywords. 


CLEAR, CLOSE, MEMORY, CREATE (Jetsam) 





314 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


OPTION BASE 





Set the base value for array subscripts. Command 


Use. 

Array subscripts may start from zero or one. The OPTION BASE command 
chooses between these alternatives. 

Form. 

OPTION BASE integer-expression 

where the integer-expression must yield a value in the range 0...1. 

Notes. 


Attempting to obey more than one OPTION BASE command will generate an 
error (Error 10). 


Attempting to obey an OPTION BASE command while any array exists will 
generate an error (Error 10). 


The default base value is 0. 


Associated Keywords. 
DIM, ERASE, CLEAR 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 315 





OPTION FIELD 


Make reserved bytes part of user record. Jetsam Command 


Use. 

To make the two bytes of a keyed record which are reserved by Jetsam into part 
of the user record. The bytes must then be defined in a FIELD command. 
Form. 

OPTION FIELD numeric-expression 


Notes. 


If numeric-expression = 2, the two bytes of the keyed record are hidden from the 
user. This is the default case. 


If numeric-expression = 0, FIELD statements must explicitly allow for two bytes 
reserved for Jetsam at the start of each record. This is compatible with older 
versions of BASIC. 

Warning. 

This command is provided solely for compatibility with older versions of BASIC 
and should not normally be used. 

Associated Keywords. 

FIELD 


316 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


OPTION FILES 


Set the default drive and user. Command 


Use. 
To change the default drive and the default user number. 


Form. 


OPTION FILES string-expression 
where string-expression is a valid user number or drive letter. The user number 
or drive letter may optionally be omitted. 


Notes. 
This command is only valid in CP/M like operating systems. 


The default drive and user are changed until changed again by BASIC or control 
is returned to the operating system. On return to the operating system, the default 
user and drive are set to their values when BASIC was invoked. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 317 





or 


OPTION INPUT 


Set trap for all console input. Command 


Use. 


To nominate a machine language subroutine to be called to input characters from 
the console. The nominated subroutine is used instead of the usual call to the 
operating system for all console input. 


Form. 
OPTION INPUT = address-expression, address-expression 
OPTION INPUT 


The first address-expression gives the address of the nominated machine 
language "Test Keyboard Status’ subroutine. 


The second address-expression gives the address of the nominated machine 
language ‘Fetch Keyboard Character’ subroutine. 
Notes. 


The first form sets new subroutines to be called. The second form and the RUN 
command cancel any previously nominated subroutines and BASIC reverts to 
using the usual operating system calls. 


The two subroutines are: 

e 'Test Keyboard Status’ 

This routine is called on a regular basis by BASIC to check if anything has been 
typed, so that Control-C and Control-S can be detected. This check is an overhead 
which affects the speed of BASIC, so this routine should be made as fast as 
possible. 

e 'Fetch Keyboard Character’ 

This routine is called when BASIC requires a character from the keyboard. The 
routine must wait until a character is available, and return it. 


The interface requirements for these routines are very strict. Any routine which 
deviates from them is likely to cause BASIC to fail. The routines may use a 
modest amount of stack. 





318 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


On Mallard-80, the interfaces for the subroutines are: 
‘Test Keyboard Status’ 


Entry: No conditions 
Exit: If a character is available: 
Carry Flag True 


A = Character from keyboard 
If no character is available: 
Carry Flag False 
A may be corrupted 
Always: ; 
BC, DE, HL and other Flags may be corrupted 
All other registers must be preserved 
‘Fetch Keyboard Character’ 
Entry: No conditions 
Exit: A = Character from keyboard 
BC, DE, HL and Flags may be corrupted 
All other registers must be preserved 


On Mallard-86: 


The address-expressions give the segment offsets of the address of the 
subroutines. The segment part of the addresses is set to the DEF SEG setting at 
the time of the OPTION INPUT command. The interfaces for the subroutines 
are: 


‘Test Keyboard Status’ 


Entry: CS contains the segment part of the subroutine address 
DS, ES & SS all contain the base of BASIC's data segment. 
Exit: If a character is available: 
Carry Flag True 


AL = Character from keyboard 


If no character is available: 
Carry Flag False 
AL may be corrupted 





Always: 


AH and other Flags may be corrupted 
All other registers must be preserved 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 319 


‘Fetch Keyboard character’ 


Entry: CS contains the segment part of the subroutine address 
DS, ES & SS all contain the base of BASIC’s data segment. 


Exit: AL = Character from keyboard 
AH and Flags may be corrupted 
All other registers must be preserved 


The subroutines are called using FAR CALL, so must return using a FAR 
RETURN. 

Associated Keywords. 

OPTION LPRINT, OPTION PRINT, DEF SEG 





320 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


On Mallard-80, the interfaces for the subroutines are: 
‘Test Keyboard Status’ 


Entry: No conditions 
Exit: If a character is available: 
Carry Flag True 


A = Character from keyboard 


If no character is available: 
Carry Flag False 
A may be corrupted 

Always: ; 
BC, DE, HL and other Flags may be corrupted 
All other registers must be preserved 


‘Fetch Keyboard Character’ 
Entry: No conditions 


Exit: A = Character from keyboard 
BC, DE, HL and Flags may be corrupted 
All other registers must be preserved 


On Mallard-86: 


The address-expressions give the segment offsets of the address of the 
subroutines. The segment part of the addresses is set to the DEF SEG setting at 
the time of the OPTION INPUT command. The interfaces for the subroutines 
are: 


‘Test Keyboard Status’ 


Entry: CS contains the segment part of the subroutine address 
DS, ES & SS all contain the base of BASIC's data segment. 
Exit: If a character is available: 
Carry Flag True 


AL = Character from keyboard 
If no character is available: 
Carry Flag False 
AL may be corrupted 
Always: 





AH and other Flags may be corrupted 
All other registers must be preserved 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 319 


‘Fetch Keyboard character' 


Entry: CS contains the segment part of the subroutine address 
DS, ES & SS all contain the base of BASIC’s data segment. 


Exit: AL = Character from keyboard 
AH and Flags may be corrupted 
All other registers must be preserved 


The subroutines are called using FAR CALL, so must return using a FAR 
RETURN. 

Associated Keywords. 

OPTION LPRINT, OPTION PRINT, DEF SEG 





320 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


OPTION LPRINT 


Set trap for all printer output. Command 


Use. 

To nominate a machine language subroutine to be called to output characters to 
the printer. The nominated subroutine is used instead of the usual call to the 
operating system for all output to the printer. 


Form. 
OPTION LPRINT = address-expression 
OPTION LPRINT 


The address-expression gives the address of the nominated machine language 
subroutine. 
Notes. 


The first form sets a new subroutine to be called. The second form and the RUN 
command cancel any previously nominated subroutine and BASIC reverts to 
using the operating system call. 


The interface requirements for this routine are very strict. Any routine which 
deviates from them is likely to cause BASIC to fail. The routine may use a 
modest amount of stack. 
On Mallard-80 the interface for the subroutine is: 

Entry: C contains the character to be sent to the printer 

Exit: A, BC, DE, HL registers and all Flags may be corrupted 
On Mallard-86: 


The address-expression gives the segment offset of the address of the 
subroutine. The segment part of the address is set to the DEF SEG setting at 
the time of the OPTION LPRINT command. The interface for the subroutine 
is: 
Entry: CL contains the character to be sent to the printer 

CS contains the segment part of the subroutine address 

DS, ES & SS all contain the base of BASIC’s data segment 


Exit: | AX and Flags may be corrupted 
All other registers must be preserved 
The subroutine is called using a FAR CALL, so must return a FAR RETURN. 
Associated Keywords. 
OPTION INPUT, OPTION PRINT, LPRNT, DEF SEG 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 321 





OPTION NOT TAB 


Turn off Tab expansion. Command 


Use. 

To prevent BASIC from transforming Tab (&H09) characters into strings of 
spaces when printing or displaying them. 

Form. 

OPTION NOT TAB 


Notes. 


BASIC usually transforms Tab (&H09) characters sent to the console or the 
printer into enough spaces to move forward to the next tab position — where tabs 
are set at every eighth column. OPTION NOT TAB overrides this action, so that 
Tab characters are sent to the printer or the console without change. It can 
therefore be used to prevent escape sequences that include &H09 from being 
transformed into an incorrect series of values. 


OPTION NOT TAB does not affect the TAB Print Function, or BASIC's Print 
Zone operations. 


OPTION NOT TAB takes effect until an OPTION TAB or a RUN command is 
executed. ; 


Associated Keywords. 
PRINT, LPRINT, WRITE, OPTION TAB, RUN 


322 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


or 


OPTION PRINT 


Set trap for all console output. Command 


Use. 


To nominate a machine language subroutine to be called to output characters to 
the console. The nominated subroutine is used instead of the usual call to the 
operating system for all output to the console. 


Form. 
OPTION PRINT = address-expression 
OPTION PRINT 


The address-expression gives the address of the nominated machine language 
subroutine. 


Notes. 


The first form sets a new subroutine to be called. The second form and the RUN 
command cancel any previously nominated subroutine and BASIC reverts to 
using the usual operating system call. 


The interface requirements for this routine are very strict. Any routine which 
deviates from them is likely to cause BASIC to fail. The routine may use a 
modest amount of stack. 


On Mallard-80 the interface for the subroutine is: 

Entry: C contains the character to be sent to the console 

Exit: A, BC, DE & HL registers and Flags may be corrupted 
On Mallard-86: 


The address-expression gives the segment offset of the address of the 
subroutine. The segment part of the address is set to the DEF SEG setting at 
the time of the OPTION LPRINT command. The interface for the subroutine 
is: 
Entry: CL contains the character to be sent to the console 

CS contains the segment part of the subroutine address 

DS, ES & SS all contain the base of BASIC’s data segment 
Exit: AX and Flags may be corrupted 

All other registers must be preserved 


The subroutine is called using a FAR CALL, so must return a FAR RETURN. 


Associated Keywords. 
OPTION INPUT, OPTION LPRINT, PRINT, DEF SEG 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 323 





OPTION RUN 


Prevent BASIC program from being suspended or stopped 


Command 
Use. 
OPTION RUN disables the effect of Control-C and Control-S from the keyboard. 
Form. 
OPTION RUN 
Notes. 


Control-C usually stops the current program and returns to Direct Mode. 
Control-S usually suspends the current program until another key is pressed. 
After an OPTION RUN command neither key has any effect. Furthermore, since 
BASIC no longer has to test for any key the program will run faster — usually 
BASIC checks the keyboard after each statement, which imposes a system 
dependent overhead. (In Run-Only versions neither Control-C nor Control-S ever 
have any effect). 


OPTION RUN interacts with INKEY$. Usually INKEY$ cannot return Control-C 
or Control-S, since BASIC reacts to Control-C and Control-S typed at INKEY$ — 
if it did not, the effect of these keys would be unpredictable in a program using 
INKEY$. After OPTION RUN, INKEY$ will return both Control-C and 
Control-S, since there can no longer be any confusion. 


Run-Only versions of BASIC ignore Control-C and Control-S for compatibility 
reasons. So the only effect of OPTION RUN or OPTION STOP is to alter the 
action of INKEY$ when presented with Control-C or Control-S. In OPTION 
STOP mode, these characters are never returned; in OPTION RUN mode, they 
will be returned if typed. 


The current OPTION RUN/STOP setting does not affect the STOP, END or 
SYSTEM commands or the way in which errors are handled. 


324 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


OPTION STOP 


Reverses the effect of OPTION RUN. Command 


Use. 

OPTION STOP will re-enable the effects of Control-C and Control-S if they have 
been disabled by OPTION RUN. 

Form. 

OPTION STOP 

Notes. 

In OPTION STOP mode, INKEY$ will never return the characters Control-C and 
Control-S. 


The current OPTION RUN/STOP setting does not affect the STOP, END or 
SYSTEM commands or the way in which errors are handled. 


Associated Keywords. 
OPTION RUN 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 325 





OPTION TAB 


Turn on Tab expansion. Command 


Use. 

To re-enable BASIC’s transformation of Tab (&H09) characters into strings of 
spaces when printing or displaying them. 

Form. 

OPTION TAB 


Notes. 


BASIC usually transforms Tab (&HO09) characters into enough spaces to move 
forward to the next tab position — where tabs are set at every eighth column. The 
OPTION NOT TAB overrides this action, so that Tab characters are sent to the 
printer or the console without change. 


OPTION TAB re-enables the transformation of Tab characters if this has been 
disabled by an OPTION NOT TAB since the last RUN command was executed. 


Associated Keywords. 
PRINT, LPRINT, WRITE, OPTION NOT TAB, RUN 


326 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


OSERR 


Return operating system dependent error indication. 
Function 


Use. 
To further identify the cause of a BASIC error 21. 


Form. 
OSERR 


Notes. 


Some operating systems return a number of miscellaneous but interesting errors 
to BASIC. Rather than have a different set of BASIC errors for each such 
operating system BASIC provides the single error number 21 and the function 
OSERR. When an error 21 has occurred the function OSERR will return an 
operating system dependent number which will identify the error. 


OSERR returms a value in the range 0...65535. 


Associated Keywords. 
ERR, ERL, ON ERROR GOTO 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 327 





OUT  OUTW 


Output a value to a processor output port. Command 
Use. 

To send a value to a given I/O port. 

Form. 


OUT port-number , integer-expression 
OUTW port-number , integer-expression 


For Mallard-80 the port-number is an integer-expression which must yield a 
value in the range 0...255. 


For Mallard-86 the port-number is an address-expression. 


The integer-expression in OUT gives the data byte to be sent to the given output 
port. The expression must yield a value in the range 0...255. 


The address-expression in OUTW gives the data word to be sent to the given 
word output port. 


Notes. 
OUTW is illegal in Mallard-80. 


Associated Keywords. 
INP, INPW, WAIT, WAITW 


328 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


PEEK 


Peek at memory location. Function 


Use. 
To read a given byte of the machine's memory. 


Form. 
PEEK (address-expression) 
Notes. 


PEEK returns a value in the range 0...255. 


In Mallard-86 the address-expression gives the offset part of the address to read 
from. The segment part is given by the User Segment Base most recently defined 
by DEF SEG. 


Associated Keywords. 
POKE, DEF SEG 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 329 


POKE 





Poke a value into machine memory. Command 
Use. 


Allows direct write access to machine memory. 

Form. 

POKE address-expression, integer-expression 

The first address-expression gives the address of the byte to be written to. 


The integer-expression gives the value to be written to the byte at the given 
address. The expression must yield a value in the range 0...255. 


Notes. 


In Mallard-86 the address-expression gives the offset part of the address to write 
to. The segment part is given by the User Segment Base most recently defined by 
DEF SEG. 


Associated Keywords. 
PEEK 


330 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


POS 





Console position. Function 
Use. 

To establish the current print position on the console. 

Form. 


POS (numeric-expression) 


where numeric-expression is a dummy argument, so POS(0) is the 
recommended form. 


Notes. 


POS returns a logical position on the console, which may bear no relation 
whatsoever to the current position of the cursor! 


In calculating the logical position all non-printing characters (those with values 
less than &H20) are not counted, except for: 


— Backspace (&HO08), which counts — 1 unless the position is one. 


— Tab (&H09), when expanded to spaces counts one for each space. (Tab 
positions 8 characters apart all the way across the console are implicitly 
defined). 


— Carriage return (&HOD), which sets the position to one. 


The position is also affected by new lines inserted by BASIC if the logical 
position exceeds the width of the console, as set by WIDTH. 


If the width is set infinite (by WIDTH 255) then the logical position will grow to 
255, but no further. 


Associated Keywords. 
LPOS, WIDTH 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 331 





PRINT 


Print to console. Command 


Use. 

To print data, numeric or string, to the console. 
Form. 

PRINT [print-list][using-clause] [separator] 
print-list is: print-item[separator print- item]* 
where print-item is: expression 


or: SPC (integer-expression) 
or: TAB (integer-expression) 


using-clause is: USING string-expression ; using-list 
where using-list is: expression[separator expression]* 


Separator is: comma or semicolon. 


(Note that the / ... ]* metalanguage construct means that the object is optional, 
but may be repeated any number of times.) 


Notes. 

See Chapter 6 for a description of print facilities. 

The print-item(s), if any, in the print-list are evaluated and printed in Free 
Format. A comma following a print-item causes BASIC to advance to the 


beginning of the next Print Zone after the item is printed. A semicolon serves 
only to separate the items, and has no effect on the output. 


If a using-clause is present, then the string-expression defines a template which 
controls the format in which the values of the expressions in the using-list are 
printed. Commas or semicolons may be used to separate the items in the using- 
list, neither has any effect on the output. 


When all the arguments have been processed a new line is started, unless the 
PRINT command ends in a separator or TAB or SPC. 


Associated Keywords. 
LPRINT, POS, PRINT #, WIDTH, ZONE 


332 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


PRINT # 


Print to file. Command 


Use. 

To put data to a file, formatted in the same way as PRINTing to the console. 
Form. 

PRINT #filenumber-expression[ , print-arguments] 


The filenumber-expression specifies the file to be printed to. The file must be 
open for Output or for Random access. 


The print-arguments take precisely the same form as in the PRINT command. If 
no arguments are given, a Carriage Return, Line Feed pair is written. 

Notes. 

See Chapter 6 for a description of print facilities. 

PRINT # is the same as PRINT, except that the output is sent to a file, not to the 
console, and that lines in a file are considered to be infinitely wide. The handling 


of the print-arguments is identical, except that Tab characters (value &HO9) are 
not expanded, and do not affect the logical position. 


It is possible to use PRINT # to output to a random access file. Characters are put 
to the random record buffer. BASIC maintains an internal pointer associated with 
the buffer, which is used to keep track of where to write next. This pointer is set 
to the start of the buffer when the file is opened and subsequently by GET and 
PUT commands. It is an error to attempt to overfill the random record buffer. 


PRINT # does not work with keyed files. 


Associated Keywords. 
PRINT, WRITE # 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 333 





or 


PUT 


Put data to random access file. Command 


Use. 


To put the contents of the random record buffer to the given record in the given 
random or keyed data file. 


Form. 


PUT file-reference[ , record-number] 
PUT file-reference, [record-number] , lock 


The file-reference specifies the file to be written to, which must be an open 
random or keyed file. 


For random files: The record-number specifies the record to be written. If no 
number is specified the record following the one in the last GET or PUT is 
assumed — if this is the first GET or PUT then record 1 is assumed. 

The lock parameter, if present, specifies the record lock to be applied to the 
record after it is written. This parameter may only be present when writing to 
random files. 


For keyed files: The record-number specifies which record in the data file is to 
be written. If the parameter is omitted the record number given by the current 
position is used. 


For Random Files Note. 
An internal pointer is associated with the random record buffer, to allow PRINT # 
et al to put data to the record. A PUT operation resets that pointer. 


For Keyed Files Note. 

The record, or the file, must be write locked. 

Only record numbers that have been returned by the FETCHREC function should 
be used. 

When a record is PUT, a check is made to ensure that the information in the first 
two bytes of the record is valid. The operation of ADDKEY and DELKEY alter 
this information, so it is important that no ADDKEY or DELKEY is performed 
between a GET and a PUT. 


For Random Files in Multiuser Versions Note. 
PUT releases any outstanding temporary record write lock. See Section 9.3.4 for 
a description of the temporary record write lock mechanism. 


Associated Keywords. 
PRINT #, WRITE #, GET 


334 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


RANDOMIZE 


Randomise the current random number seed. Command 


Use. 

BASIC's random number generator produces a pseudo-random sequence, in 
which each number depends completely on the previous number. Starting from a 
given value the sequence is always the same. RANDOMIZE sets a new initial 
value for the random number generator, either to a given value, or to a value 
entered by the operator. 

Form. 


RANDOMIZE [integer-expression] 


If the expression is omitted then the operator is prompted: 

Random Number Seed ? 

to get a suitable value, which may be any form of number. 

Notes. 

Setting the initial random number to the same number will result in the same 
sequence being generated. 

Associated Keywords. 

RND 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 335 


RANKSPEC 


Specify whether rank may have duplicate keys. Function 


Use. 

To set whether a rank may have keys added which have identical values to 
existing keys. 

Form. 

RANKSPEC (file-reference, rank, unique) 

where: 

file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 

rank gives the rank number being affected. 


unique is a numeric-expression which has the value 0 when duplicate keys may 
be added for the given rank. If it has the value 1 then duplicate keys may not be 
added. 


Return Codes. 


0 Success the rank has a new unique property 
130 Failure the file is read locked by another user 
Notes. 


The RANKSPEC setting is stored in the file header. It remains set until another 
RANKSPEC is issued. Newly created files are automatically set up to allow the 
use of duplicate keys. 


If duplicates are not allowed then ADDKEY and ADDREC fail with the Return 
Code 116. The duplicate is not added and the current position is set to the 
duplicate within the file. 


Setting RANKSPEC does not check whether a file currently contains duplicate 
keys — it merely affects their addition in the future. 


The RANKSPEC function causes the keyed file to be marked inconsistent. It will 
be marked consistent again if it is successfully closed or CONSOLIDATEd. 


Associated Keywords. 
ADDKEY, ADDREC 


336 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


RD 





Remove a directory. Command 


Use. 


For Mallard-86 MSDOS 2 version, this removes a directory from the specified, or 
default drive. 


Mallard-86 MSDOS 1 version, all CP/M versions and Mallard-80 all ignore this 
command. 


Form. 


RD dir-name 
where the dir-name specifies the directory to remove. 


Notes. 
The directory must exist and be empty, except for . and .. 
The directory must not be the current directory. 


This command takes the rest of the current line as its argument, irrespective of 
colons or single quotes. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHDIR, MKDIR, RMDIR, CD, MD, CHDIR$, FINDDIR$ 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 337 


READ 


Read from DATA statements. Command 


Use. 
READ fetches data from DATA statements and assigns it to variables. 


Form. 
READ list-of: variable 


Notes. 

All the DATA statements in a program, taken in order, form a list of constants. 
These constants may be read into variables by the READ command. READ steps 
on to the next constant in the list and assigns it to the next variable in the list of 
variables given. The constant and the variable to which it is read must be 
compatible. Attempting to READ past the last DATA constant generates an error 
(Error 4). 


Associated Keywords. 
DATA, RESTORE 


338 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


REM 





Remark. Command 
Use. 

To put comments into BASIC programs. 

Form. 

REM rest-of-line 


BASIC ignores the rest of the line after the REM. Note that colon (statement 
separator) is also ignored. 


Notes. 


REM ‘commands' may be executed, and have no effect — execution continues 
with the first command in the next line. It is permissible to transfer control to a 
REM command, by GOTO or by GOSUB. 


A single quote character in a line (not in a string) is equivalent to : REM, and may 
also prefix comment text, except in: 


— DATA commands where a single quote is treated as part of an unquoted string. 


— DEL, ERA, DIR, REN and TYPE commands, where the rest of the line is 
taken as the command’s parameter. 


Some languages have a remainder operator called REM. This is a fruitful source 
of syntax errors in BASIC programs. BASIC has an operator called MOD. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 339 





REN 





Rename file. Command 


Use. 
To change the name of a disc file. 


Form. 
— in versions for CP/M-type operating systems: 


REN new-name=old-name 


— in versions for MS-DOS (PC-DOS) type operating systems: 
REN old-name new name 


The old-name is a file-name specifying the file the name of which is to be 
changed. 


The new-name is a file-name giving the new name for the file. 


Notes. 
The file must exist. No file with the new name may exist. 


REN takes the rest of the current line as its arguments, irrespective of colons or 
single quotes. 


Renaming an open file is not recommended. On multiuser systems this command 
may fail if the file is in use by other users or if the file is locked. 


Associated Keywords. 
NAME 


340 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


or 
or 
or 


RENUM 


Renumber the current program. Command 
Unavailable in Run-Only versions 

Use. 

To renumber all or part of a program. 

Form. 

RENUM 


RENUM new-line-number 
RENUM [new-line-number] , old-line-number 
RENUM [new-line-number] , [old line-number] , increment 


If no parameters are given this is equivalent to RENUM 10,,10. 
new-line-number is a line-number, giving the new number for the first line to be 


renumbered. If omitted 10 is assumed. 


old-line-number is a line-number, giving the first line to be renumbered. If 
omitted the first line of the program is assumed. 


increment is a line-number, giving the increment to use between the new line 
numbers. If omitted 10 is assumed. 
Notes. 


RENUM adjusts references to line numbers throughout the program to refer to the 
changed line numbers. Line number references in the following commands are 
affected: 


ELSE, GOSUB, GOTO, LIST, LLIST, RESTORE, RESUME, RUN, THEN, 
DELETE and the DELETE in CHAIN MERGE 


(see also ERL which interacts with RENUM). 
When part of the program is renumbered RENUM disallows any attempt to 


change the order of lines, or to use line numbers already in use in the part of the 
program which is not being renumbered. 


If RENUM discovers line number references to lines that do not exist BASIC 
produces the message: 


Undefined line 99999 in 88888 





where: 999949 is the line number which is referred to, but does not exist. The 
reference is left unchanged. 


and: 88888 is the new number of the line in which the reference occurs. 
After a RENUM command BASIC returns to Direct Mode. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 341 


RESET 


Reset file system. Command 
Use. 

To reset the file system so that discs may be changed. 

Form. 

RESET [string-expression] 


Notes. 


The optional string-expression indicates which drives are to be reset — all the files 
on these drives are closed. The string-expression specifies the drive: its value 
must be a valid drive letter for the operating system that is being used. The string- 
expression may not be null. 


RESET without a parameter resets all drives and closes all files. 


Any open keyed files are not marked consistent, so these should be closed 
explicitly beforehand. 


On multiuser systems this command may fail as other users may be using files, 
preventing a reset of the disc filing system. 


Associated Keywards. 
CLOSE 


342 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


RESTORE 


Restore pointer into DATA list. Command 


Use. 

To move the internal pointer to the next DATA item to a given position (typically 
back to the first DATA statement). 

Form. 

RESTORE [line-number] 

The line-number gives the line to which the DATA pointer is to be set. If omitted 
the pointer is set back to the start of the program. 

Notes. 


READ commands move a pointer to DATA items through the program. The 
RESTORE command moves that pointer to a specified position in the program. 
The next READ command executed will search forward from that point for the 
next DATA statement, and start reading from there. 


Associated Keywords. 
READ, DATA 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 343 





ie) 
ie) 


ROR 


RESUME 


Resume execution after processing an error. Command 
Legal only in Error Processing Mode 

Use. 

When an error has been trapped by an ON ERROR GOTO routine, and has been 

processed by it, RESUME allows normal execution to continue, from a variety of 

points. 

Form. 

RESUME 

RESUME line-number 

RESUME NEXT 

Notes. 


RESUME is legal only during Error Processing Mode (ie. in an ON ERROR 
GOTO routine). 


RESUME with no parameter returns control to the beginning of the statement in 
which the error was detected. 


RESUME line-number returns control at the specified line. 


RESUME NEXT returns control to the statement immediately after the statement 
in which the error was detected. 


Associated Keywords. 
ON ERROR GOTO 


344 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


RETURN 


Return from subroutine. Command 


Use. 

Signals the end of a subroutine, BASIC returns to continue processing after the 
GOSUB which invoked it. 

Form. 

RETURN 

Notes. 

It is permissible to RETURN from a subroutine during a FOR or WHILE loop. 
RETURNing in this way abandons any active FOR or WHILE loops started since 
the GOSUB which invoked the subroutine. 

Associated Keywords. 

GOSUB, ON x GOSUB 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 345 


RIGHT$ 


Extract righthand part of string. Function 
Use. 

To extract a given number of characters from the righthand end of a given string. 
Form. 

RIGHTS (string-expression, integer-expression) 

The string-expression gives the string from which to extract characters. 


The integer-expression gives how many characters to extract, and must yield a 
value in the range 0...255. 
Notes. 


If the given string is shorter than the required length, then the entire string is 
returned. Otherwise the righthand end of the string is returned, giving a string of 
the required length. 


Associated Keywords. 
MID$, LEFT$ 


346 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


RMDIR 





Remove a directory. Command 


Use. 
For Mallard-86 MSDOS 2 version, this removes a directory from the specified, or 
default drive. 


Mallard-86 MSDOS 1 version, all CP/M versions and Mallard-80 all ignore this 
command. 


Form. 


RMDIR String-expression 
where the string-expression yields a dir-name which specifies the directory to 
remove. 


Notes. 
The directory must exist and be empty, except for . and . . 
The directory must not be the current directory. 


Associated Keywords. 
CHDIR, MKDIR, CD, MD, RD, CHDIR$, FINDDIR$ 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 347 





RND 


Random Number. Function 


Use. 

To get arandom number. This may be the next in the current sequence, the last 
random number repeated or the first in a new sequence. 

Form. 

RND/ (numeric-expression) ] 

Notes. 


RND retums a Single Length value, where 0 < value < 1. The pseudo-random 
number generator produces each number by operating on the previous one, so that 
from the same initial value, the same sequence is produced. 


RND with the expression omitted, or with an expression yielding a value greater 
than zero, returns the next random number in the current sequence. 


RND with an expression yielding the value zero returns a copy of the last random 
number generated. 


RND with an expression yielding a value less than zero starts a new sequence 
loosely, but predictably, based on that value. The first number in the new 
sequence is returned. 


Associated Keywords. 
RANDOMIZE 





348 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


ROUND 


Round value. Function 


Use. 

To round a value to a given number of decimal places, or to a given power of ten. 
Form. 

ROUND (numeric-expression|[ , decimals]) 


The numeric-expression yields the value to be rounded, which may be of any 
numeric type. 


The optional decimals parameter specifies the number of decimal places to round 
to. If present decimals is an integer-expression yielding a value in the range 
—39...+39, 

Notes. 

The value of the numeric-expression is rounded to the number of decimal places 
specified by decimals, as follows: 


decimals greater than 0 
— the value is rounded to the given number of decimal digits after the decimal 
point. 
decimals zero or absent 
— the value is rounded to an integer 
decimals less than zero 
— the value is rounded to give ABS (decimals) zeros before the decimal point. 
(Rounding means round to nearest as described in Section 2.9.1.) 


_ Associated Keywords. 
INT, FIX, CINT 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 349 





RSET 


Set one string to another, right justified. Command 


Use. 

To replace the contents of one string by another, filling with spaces on the left to 
the same length as the original contents. 

Form. 

RSET string-variable = string-expression 

Notes. 


The string-expression is evaluated and then forced to the same length as the 
current value of the given string-variable — either by padding with spaces at the 
lefthand end, or by discarding characters from the righthand end. The result 
replaces the original contents of the string-variable. 


RSET is particularly useful for setting new values into fields of a random record. 


Associated Keywords. 
FIELD, LSET, MID$, MKI$, MKS$, MKD$ 





350 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


RUN filename 


Load and start executing a program. Command 
Use. 

To load a program from file and start executing it. 

Form. 

RUN string-expression[ , R] 

The string-expression gives the filename of the file to load from. If no type 
extension is given .BAS is assumed. 

Notes. 


Any existing program, user functions, variables and arrays are deleted from 
memory. DEFINT, DEFSNG, DEFDBL, DEFSTR and OPTION BASE settings 
are reset. Unless the ,R option is specified all files are closed. RUN resets 
OPTION TAB, OPTION PRINT, OPTION LPRINT, OPTION INPUT and 
OPTION STOP to their standard states. 


RUN filename is equivalent to LOAD filename followed by RUN. 
RUN filename, R is equivalent to LOAD filename, R. 


Associated Keywords. 
LOAD, CHAIN, SAVE, CHAIN MERGE, CHAIN 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 351 





RUN [line-number] 


Start executing current program. Command 
Use. 


To start executing the current program, either at the beginning, or at a given line. 
Form. 

RUN [line-number] 

If the line-number is omitted, then execution starts at the first line of the program. 


Notes. 


Any existing program, user functions, variables and arrays are deleted from 
memory. DEFINT, DEFSNG, DEFDBL, DEFSTR and OPTION BASE settings 
are reset. All files are closed. RUN resets OPTION TAB, OPTION PRINT, 
OPTION LPRINT, OPTION INPUT and OPTION STOP to their standard states. 





352 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


SAVE 


Save program on disc. Command 


Use. 

To write the program currently in memory to disc. Three formats for program 
files are supported. 

Form. 

SAVE filename-expression| , form-specifier] 

The filename-expression gives the name of the file to which the program is to be 
written. If no type extension is specified, .BAS is assumed. If a file of that name 
already exists it is deleted. 

The form-specifier may be one of: 

A — specifying ASCII form. 

P — specifying Protected form. 

If no form-specifier is given Standard form is produced. 


Notes. 


Standard form saved files contain the BASIC program in a processed form, 
suitable only for reloading into memory by BASIC. 


ASCII form saved files contain the BASIC program in the same form as in a 
listing. These files may be processed by other programs — for instance text 
editors. 


Protected form saved files are similar to Standard form files, except that the 
program is encrypted. BASIC disallows any command that gives access to the 
program text after loading a Protected form file. 


Associated Keywords. 
LOAD, RUN, CHAIN, CHAIN MERGE, MERGE 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 353 


SEEKKEY 


Seek to a given key. Jetsam Function 


Use. 


Move the current position to the first key with the given value in the given rank. 


Form. 


SEEKKEY (file-reference, lock, rank, key-value) 


The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 


The lock parameter specifies what lock to apply to the record referred to by the 
first key entry with the required key-value in the specified rank. 


Return codes. 


0 


103 


105 


132 
133 


Notes. 


Success 


Failure 


Failure 


Failure 
Failure 


the current position has been set to the first key entry with 
the required value and rank, and the associated record has 
been locked as specified. 

no key entry with the required value and rank exists, nor do 
any higher value keys in this or any higher numbered rank 
exist. The current position has been unset. 

no key entry with the required value and rank exists. The 
current position is set to key entry which would immediately 
follow the specified key if it were in the index. 


could not read lock the record as requested. 
could not write lock the record as requested. 


SEEKKEY may be used to access the data records randomly by key. 


Associated Keywords. 
SEEKRANK, SEEKREC, SEEKNEXT, SEEKSET, SEEKPREV 





354 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


SEEKNEXT 


Seek the next key. Jetsam Function 


Use. 
Starting from the given position move forward to the next key entry. 


Form. 
SEEKNEXT (file-reference, lock[ , index-position] ) 


The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 
The Jock parameter specifies the lock to apply to the next record. 


The index-position parameter specifies which key entry to step forward from. If 

the parameter is omitted the current position is assumed. 

Return codes. 

0 Success the new current position is in the same key set (it has the same 
key value and rank) as the previous position. 


101 Success the new current position is not in the same key set (it has a 
different key value) but is in the same rank as the previous 
position. 

102 Success the new current position is in the next, existing, rank. 

103 Failure the current position or given index-position is the last key of any 
rank in the index. The current position has been unset. 

105 Failure the current position or given index-position does not exist. The 
current position is set to the first key entry in the key set which 
would immediately follow the specified position if it were in the 
index — if no such entry exists then the current position is unset. 

115 Failure the index-position parameter was omitted and the current 
position was unset. 

132 Failure could not read lock the record as requested. 


133 Failure could not write lock the record as requested. 


Notes. 
SEEKNEXT may be used to access the data records sequentially by key. 





Associated Keywords. 
SEEKRANK, SEEKKEY, SEEKREC, SEEKSET, SEEKPREV 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 355 





SEEKPREV 


Seek the previous key. Jetsam Function 


Use. 
Starting from the given position move back to the previous key entry. 


Form. 

SEEKPREV (file-reference, lock[ , index-position] ) 

The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 

The lock parameter specifies the lock to apply to the previous record. 


The index-position parameter specifies which key entry to step back from. If the 
parameter is omitted the current position is assumed. 
Return codes, 


0 Success the new current position is in the same key set (it has the same 
key value and rank) as the old position. 


101 Success the new current position is not in the same key set (it has a 
different key value) but is in the same rank as the old position. 


102 Success the new current position is in the previous, existing, rank. 


103 Failure the current position or given index-position is the first key of 
any rank in the index. The current position has been unset. 


105 Failure the current position or given index-position does not exist. The 
current position is set to the first key entry in the key set which 
would immediately follow the specified position if it were in the 
index — if no such entry exists then the current position is unset. 


115 Failure the index-position parameter was omitted and the current 
position was unset. 


132 Failure could not read lock the record as requested. 
133. Failure could not write lock the record as requested. 


Notes. 
SEEKPREV may be used to access the data records sequentially by key. 


Associated Keywords. 
SEEKRANK, SEEKKEY, SEEKREC, SEEKNEXT, SEEKSET 


356 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


SEEKRANK 


Seek the first key of the given rank. Jetsam Function 


Use. 
To move the current position to the first key entry in the given rank. 


Form. 
SEEKRANK (file-reference, lock, rank) 
The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 


The lock parameter specifies what lock to apply to the record referred to by the 
first key entry in the specified rank. 
Return codes. 


0 Success the current position has been set to the first key entry in the 
required rank, and the required record lock obtained. 


102 Failure there are no key entries in the required rank. The current 
position has been set to the first entry in the next existing rank. 


103 Failure there are no key entries in the required rank, nor in any higher 
numbered rank. The current position has been unset. 


132 Failure could not read lock the record as requested. 
133 Failure could not write lock the record as requested. 


Notes. 


SEEKRANK may be used to move the current position ready for sequential 
processing. 


Associated Keywords. 
SEEKKEY, SEEKREC, SEEKNEXT, SEEKSET, SEEKPREV 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 357 





SEEKREC 


Set the current position. Jetsam Function 


Use. 
To restore the current position from previously recorded values. 


Form. 

SEEKREC (file-reference, lock[ , index-position] ) 

The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 
The lock parameter specifies what lock to apply to the record. 


The index-position specifies where to set the current position. If this parameter is 
omitted the current position is assumed. 
Return codes. 


0 Success the current position has been set as specified, and the required 
record lock obtained. 


103 Failure no key entry with the required value, rank and record number 
exists, nor do any higher value keys in this or any higher 
numbered rank exist. The current position has been unset. 


105 Failure no key entry with the required value, rank and record number 
exists. The current position is set to first key entry in the key 
set which would immediately follow the specified key if it were 
in the index. 


115 Failure the index-position parameter was omitted and the current 
position has been unset. 


132 Failure could not read lock the record as requested. 
133 Failure could not write lock the record as requested. 
Notes. 


SEEKREC may be used to reset the current position to a previously found key 
entry. 


Associated Keywords. 
SEEKRANK, SEEKKEY, SEEKNEXT, SEEKSET, SEEKPREV 


358 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


SEEKSET 


Seek the next key different from the current key. 
Jetsam Function 


Use. 

Starting from the given position move forward to the first key entry in the next 
key set (ie. the next key entry with a different key value). 

Form. 

SEEKSET (file-reference, lock[ , index-position] ) 

The file-reference gives the file number of an open keyed file. 

The lock parameter specifies the lock to apply to the new current record. 


The index-position parameter specifies which key entry to step forward from. If 

the parameter is omitted the current position is assumed. 

Return codes. 

101 Success the new current position is in the same rank as the previous 
entry. 

102 Succes the new current position is in the next, existing, rank. 


103 Failure the current position or given index-position is in the last key set 
of any rank in the index. The current position has been unset. 

105 Failure the current position or given index-position does not exist. The 
current position is set to the first key entry in the key set which 
would immediately follow the specified position if it were in the 
index — if no such entry exists then the current position is unset. 


115 Failure the index-position parameter was omitted and the current 
position was unset. 


132 Failure could not read lock the record as requested. 
133 Failure could not write lock the record as requested. 


Notes. 


SEEKSET is similar to SEEKNEXT, except that the latter does not skip past key 
entries of equal value. 


Associated Keywords. 
SEEKRANK, SEEKKEY, SEEKREC, SEEKNEXT, SEEKPREV 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 359 





SGN 





Sign of value. 
Use. 


To determine the sign of a given value. 


Form. 

SGN (numeric-expression) 

Notes. 

SGN returns an Integer value: 
—1 if numeric-expression is <0 

0 if numeric-expression is = 0 

+1 if numeric-expression is >0 

Associated Keywords. 

ABS 


360 


Function 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


SIN 





Sine. Function 


Use. 

To calculate the Sine of a given value, given that the argument is expressed in 
radians. 

Form. 

SIN (numeric-expression) 

The numeric-expression gives the angle, which must yield a value in the 
approximate range —200,000...200,000 radians. 

Notes. 


With angles very much greater than 27 the accuracy of this function becomes 
increasingly badly affected by the scaling of the angle into the range —7...+7. 
Rather than return a very inaccurate figure, BASIC will not evaluate SIN for 


values much beyond the range given above. 


While the numeric-expression may be of any numeric type, the argument is 
forced to Single Length before it is processed. SIN returns a Single Length value. 


Associated Keywords. 
COS, TAN, ATN 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 361 





SPACE$ 


String of spaces. Function 
Use. 

To create a string of spaces of a given length. 

Form. 


SPACES (integer-expression) 
where integer-expression must yield a value in the range 0...255, and specifies the 
length required. (A length of zero returns a null string.) 


Associated Keywords. 
SPC, TAB, STRINGS 


362 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


SPC 





Print a given number of spaces. Print Function 


Use. 

In a print command SPC prints a given number of spaces. 
Form. 

SPC (number-of-spaces) 


Number-of-spaces is an integer-expression. If number-of-spaces is negative, zero 
is assumed. If the value is greater than the device width then it is reduced to the 
range 1...device-width by a suitable number of subtractions of the device width. 
The resulting value gives the number of spaces to print. 


Notes. 
SPC functions may only be used as items in a print command. 


The given number of spaces are printed, starting unconditionally at the current 
position. SPACE$ is not quite equivalent, since BASIC would check that the 
string fitted on the current line, and possibly issue a carriage return before the 
spaces. 

SPC need not be followed by a comma or semi-colon, a semi-colon is assumed 
(including when SPC is the last item in the print command). 


Associated Keywords. 
LPRINT, PRINT, PRINT #, SPACE$, TAB 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 363 





SQR 


Square Root. Function 
Use. 

Evaluate the square root of a given value. 

Form. 

SOR (numeric-expression) 

where the numeric-expression must yield a value greater than or equal to zero. 


Notes. 


While the numeric-expression may be of any numeric type, the argument is 
forced to Single Length before it is processed. SQR returns a Single Length 
result. 


364 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


STOP 


Stop execution. Command 


Use. 

To stop execution of a program, but leave BASIC in a state where the program 
can be restarted after the STOP command. This may be used to interrupt a 
program at a particular point when debugging. 

Form. 

STOP 

Notes. 

When the STOP is obeyed BASIC halts program execution and prints a ‘Break’ 
message. (In Run Only versions STOP is equivalent to END). 

Execution may be restarted after a STOP by using the CONT command. 


Associated Keywords. 
CONT, END 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 365 


STR$ 





String representation of numeric value. Function 


Use. 

To convert given numeric value to a decimal string representation. 
Form. 

STRS (numeric-expression) 


Notes. 


The value of the numeric-expression is converted to a decimal string in the same 
form as used in a PRINT command. Note that positive values yield a string with 
a leading space, whereas negative values have a leading minus sign. 


Associated Keywords. 
VAL, PRINT, DEC$, HEX$, OCT$ 


366 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


STRING$ 


String of a particular character. Function 


Use. 

To construct a string consisting of a given character repeated a given number of 
times. The character may be specified by its numeric value. 

Form. 

STRINGS (integer-expression, character-specifier) 


The integer-expression gives the required length of the result string, and must 
yield a value in the range 0...255. 


The character-specifier may be one of: 


integer-expression specifying CHRS (integer-expression) 
string-expression specifying the first character of the string 


Notes. 
The ASCII character set is listed in Appendix VIII. 


Associated Keywords. 
SPACES 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 367 


STRIP$ 


Strip Bit 7 from all characters in a string. Function 


Use. 

To create a string which is a copy of another, except that Bit 7 of every character 
in the string is set to zero. 

Form. 

STRIPS (string-expression) 

Notes. 


The result of the string expression is returned, with every character forced into the 
normal ASCII range (values 0...127) by setting the top bit (Bit 7) to zero. This 
may be used to remove any parity setting on characters, or to remove markers 
which make use of the ‘extra’ bit. 


Associated Keywords. 
LOWER$, UPPER$ 


368 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


SWAP 





Swap the contents of two variables. Command 


Use. 

To exchange the contents of two variables, without requiring an intermediate 
variable. 

Form. 

SWAP variable , variable 


The two variables must be of the same type. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 369 


SYSTEM 


Return to system level. 
Use. 


To leave BASIC and return to system level. 


Form. 
SYSTEM 


Notes. 
All open files are closed. 


Command 





370 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


TAB 





Space forward to given position. Print Function 
Use. 

In a print command TAB prints spaces to move to the given print position. 
Form. 

TAB (print-position) 

print-position is an integer-expression. If print-position is less than one, one is 
assumed. If the value is greater than the device width, then it is reduced to the 
range 1...device-width by a suitable number of subtractions of the device width. 
The resulting value gives the print position to which to move. 

Notes. 

TAB functions may only appear as items in a print command. 

If the required print position is greater than or equal to the current position, 


spaces are printed until the required position is reached (this may print nothing at 
all). 


If the required print position is less than the current position, BASIC issues a new 
line followed by spaces to reach the required position on the new line. 


TAB need not be followed by a comma or semi-colon; a semi-colon is assumed 
(including when TAB is the last item in the print command). 


Associated Keywords. 
LPRINT, PRINT, PRINT #, SPC 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 371 





TAN 





Tangent. Function 


Use. 

To calculate the Tangent of a given value, given that the argument is expressed in 
radians. 

Form. 

TAN (numeric-expression) 

The numeric-expression gives the angle in radians, and must yield a value in the 
approximate range —200,000 to +200,000. 

Notes. 


With angles very much greater than 27 the accuracy of this function becomes 
increasingly badly affected by the scaling of the angle into the range —m...+7. 
Rather than return a very inaccurate figure, BASIC will not evaluate TAN for 


values much beyond the range given above. 


While the numeric-expression may be of any numeric type, the argument is 
forced to Single Length before it is processed. TAN returns a Single Length 
value. 


Associated Keywords. 
COS, SIN, ATN 


372 Mallard BASIC; Reference 


TRON _TROFF 


Turn on and off tracing. Command 
Unavailable in Run Only versions 

Use. 

BASIC includes a facility to trace the execution of a program, by reporting the 

number of each line just before it is executed. 

Form. 


TRON 
TROFEF 


Notes. 
TRON enables the trace feature. TROFF disables it. 


While tracing is enabled the number of each line is printed on the console 
(enclosed in square brackets) just before the line is executed. 


TRON is automatically reset whenever a new program is loaded, that is by NEW, 
LOAD, CHAIN and RUN ‘file’ commands. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 373 





TYPE 





Type file to console. Command 
Use. 


To print a given file on the console. 

Form. 

TYPE filename 

The filename may not contain 'wild card’ characters. 


Notes. 


The file specified is read and written directly to the console. Typing Control-C 
will abandon the operation and return to Direct Mode (except in Run-Only 
versions or after OPTION RUN, when Control-C is ignored). 


While the file is being written to the console, typing Control-S will suspend 
output (except in Run-Only versions or after OPTION RUN, when Control-S is 
ignored). Output may be restarted in the usual way (see Section 3.3). 


TYPE takes the rest of the current line as its argument, irrespective of colons or 
single quotes. 


Tabs and carriage returns are treated in the usual way, and console width is 
enforced. All other characters are sent to the console exactly as read from the 
file, so control characters and characters outside the normal ASCII range may be 
included in the file to produce special console effects. 

Associated Keywords. 


DISPLAY 


374 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


UNT 





Convert unsigned integer. Function 


Use. 


To convert the given value to an Integer, interpreting the value as an unsigned 
sixteen bit integer. 


Form. 
UNT (address-expression) 


Notes. 


UNT returns an Integer value in the range —32768 to +32767 (ie. the 2's 
complement equivalent of the unsigned value of the address-expression). See 
Section 2.10 for a description of unsigned integers. 


Associated Keywords. 
INT, FIX, CINT, ROUND 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 375 





UPPER$ 


Convert string to upper case. Function 


Use. 

To create a new string which is a copy of another, with all lower case alphabetic 
characters converted to upper case equivalents. 

Form. 

UPPERS (string-expression) 


Notes. 


The result of the string-expression is returned, with any characters in the range 
a...Z converted to the equivalent character in the range A...Z. 


Associated Keywords. 
LOWER$ 





376 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


USR 





Invoke external user function. Function 


Use. 


Invokes one of the ten possible external user functions. External functions are 
defined by DEF USR commands, in which the machine address of the function is 
given. 


Form. 
USR[digit] (expression) 


The digit may be in the range 0...9. If digit is omitted, 0 is assumed. USR digit 
must previously have been defined in a DEF USR command. 


The expression may be any form of expression. 


Notes. 
See Appendix III for a discussion of external functions and subroutines. 


Associated Keywords. 
DEF USR, CALL, DEF SEG 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 377 





VAL 





Convert string to numeric value. Function 
Use. 


To take a string representation of a number and convert it to a numeric value. 
Form. 

VAL (string-expression) 

Notes. 


VAL converts the given string to a number in the same way as INPUT. The result 
returned will either be Integer or Double Length (so if there is any fraction part 
VAL returns the maximum possible precision). 


Associated Keywords. 
STR$ 


378 Mallard BASIC: Reference 





10) 


-VARPTR 


1 


Get pointer to variable. Function 


Use. 

To get the address of a given variable or file buffer, so that it can be passed to an 
external function or subroutine. 

Form. 

VARPTR (variable) 

VARPTR (#file-number-expression) 


The first form returns the address of the given variable. If the variable is 
subscripted, the address of that element of the array is returned. 


The second form returns the address of the buffer for the given file. The file must 
be open. 

Notes. 

VARPTR returns a Single Length value in the range 0...65535. 

See Appendix III for a discussion of external functions and subroutines. 


When used with a JETSAM keyed file, VARPTR returns the address of the first 
reserved byte; 2 should be added to this value to give the address of the first byte 
of user data. 


Associated Keywords. 
CALL, USR, DEF USR, UNT 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 379 





VERSION 





Determine which version of BASIC is in use. Function 


Use. 


BASIC makes every effort to hide the differences which exist between the 
various processors and operating systems with which it may be used. 
Occasionally a program may need to know about the version of BASIC it is 
running under. This function may be used to get this information. 


Form. 
VERSION (integer-expression) 


The integer-expression must yield a value in the range 0...4, specifying what type 
of version information is required. 


Notes. 


The VERSION function returns an integer value. The meaning of that value 
depends on the parameter as follows: 


Parameter Return Meaning 


Values 
0 ii 8080/8085 version of BASIC 

8 Z80 version of BASIC 

16 8088/8086 version of BASIC 
1 0 Full BASIC interpreter 

1 Run-Only BASIC Interpreter 
2 1 Single User BASIC 

2 Multiuser BASIC 
3 1 CP/M type BASIC 

MS-DOS (PC-DOS)type BASIC 

4 i" Operating System dependent version information 


380 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


WAIT WAITW 


Wait on I/O port. Command 


Use. 

To wait until a given I/O port returns a particular bit pattern. 

Form. 

WALT port-number, mask [, inversion] 

WALTW port-number, mask [ , inversion] 

For Mallard-80 the port-number is an integer-expression, which must yield a 
value in the range 0..255. 

For Mallard-86 the port-number is an address-expression. 


In WAIT both the mask and inversion parts are integer-expressions, which must 
yield values in the range 0..255. 


In WAITW both the mask and inversion parts are address-expressions. 


Notes. 

BASIC enters a loop reading from the I/O port, Exclusive ORing the value read 
with the inversion and then ANDing with the mask, until the result is non zero. 
(If no inversion is given, then the Exclusive OR step is omitted.) WAIT reads 
bytes from the I/O port; WAITW reads words. 


Note that there is no way of interrupting this loop, so BASIC will remain in it 
indefinitely if the required condition never occurs. 


Associated Keywords. 
INP, INPW, OUT, OUTW 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 381 





WEND 


Mark the end of a WHILE loop. Command 


Use. 

A WHILE loop repeatedly executes a section of a program while a given 
condition is true. The WEND command defines the end of the loop. 

Form. 

WEND 

Notes. 


The WEND command defines the end of a WHILE loop. The way in which 
WHILE and WEND are tied together is described under WHILE. When a 
WEND command is encountered BASIC knows which (if any) WHILE it must be 
associated with. 


It is an error to execute a WEND which is not associated with an active WHILE. 


Associated Keywords. 
WHILE 


382 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


WHILE 


Start a WHILE loop. Command 


Use. 


A WHILE loop repeatedly executes a section of program while a given condition 
is true. The WHILE command defines the head of a loop, and gives the 
condition. The WEND command defines the end of a loop. 


Form. 
WHILE logical-expression 


Notes. 

When the WHILE command is obeyed the logical-expression is evaluated. If the 
result is zero BASIC skips to the matching WEND. If the result is not zero, 
execution continues until the matching WEND is met, whereupon BASIC loops 
back to the WHILE command, and the process is repeated. 


The WHILE loop does not terminate suddenly when the condition given by the 
logical-expression becomes false. The condition is only tested once each time the 
end of the loop, the WEND, is reached. 


The WEND command which matches a given WHILE is established statically 
when the WHILE is first executed. That is to say that the WEND which matches 
the WHILE depends on the order of statements in the program, quite independent 
of the order of execution. It is not possible, therefore, to have more than one 
WEND associated with a given WHILE. 


WHILE loops may be nested, both inside other WHILE loops and inside FOR 
loops. 


It is permissible to terminate a WHILE loop by avoiding the WEND. 


Associated Keywords. 
WEND, FOR 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 383 





WIDTH 


Set width of console. Command 


Use. 

To tell BASIC how wide the console is in characters. This information is used 
when printing to the console, to allow BASIC to generate new lines at the 
appropriate moments. 


Since many consoles automatically start new lines, WIDTH may be used to tell 
BASIC where the console does this, so that it can avoid generating new lines as 
well. 


Form. 
WIDTH width[ , Auto-CRLF-column] 


Width is an integer-expression which gives the console width in characters, and 
must yield a value in the range 1 to 255 (though small values may have curious 
effects). 


Auto-CRLF-column, if given, is an integer-expression which gives the console's 
Auto CRLF position (see below), and must yield a value in the range 1..255. If 
the parameter is omitted the previous setting is retained. 


Notes. 


Setting the width to 255 has special meaning. BASIC treats the console as being 
infinitely wide, so never generates new lines. BASIC maintains a counter giving 
the logical position on the console. When the logical position reaches 255 the 
counter is no longer incremented, so all positions greater than 255 are treated as 
255. The line editor is not affected by setting width 255, but continues to operate 
with the last ‘real’ (ie non-255) width setting. 


Setting the Auto CRLF column to 255 causes BASIC to assume that the console 
never generates new lines. Any other setting gives the column which when 
written to causes the console to generate a new line. BASIC will avoid generating 
an extra new line when the width and Auto CRLF column are equal. It is not 
sensible to set the Auto CRLF position less than the screen width (except when 
special width 255 is used). 


The width setting affects all output to the console. 


Associated Keywords. 
WIDTH LPRINT, PRINT, POS, EDIT 


384 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


WIDTH LPRINT 


Set width of line printer. Command 


Use. 

To tell BASIC how wide the line printer is in characters. This information is used 
when printing to the line printer, to allow BASIC to generate new lines at the 
appropriate moments. 

Form. 

WIDTH LPRINT integer-expression 

The integer-expression must yield a value in the range 1 to 255 (though small 
values may have curious effects). 

Notes. 

The initial value of line printer width is 132. 

Setting the width to 255 has special meaning. BASIC treats the line printer as 
being infinitely wide, so never generates new lines. BASIC maintains a counter 
giving the logical position on the printer. When the logical position reaches 255 


the counter is no longer incremented, so all positions greater than 255 are treated 
as 255. 


The width setting affects all output to the line printer. 


Associated Keywords. 
WIDTH, LPRINT, LPOS 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 385 





WRITE 


Write to console. Command 


Use. 

To print the values of a number of expressions to the console, separating them by 
commas and enclosing strings in double quotes. 

Form. 

WRITE [write-list] 

write-list is: expression[separator expression]* 

where separator may be comma or semi-colon, interchangeably. 


(The / ... J* construct indicates an optional part, which, if present, may be 
repeated any number of times.) 
Notes. 
Write is similar to PRINT, except that: 
— print zones are ignored 
— strings are printed enclosed in double quotes 
— commas are added between the printed items 
— WRITE does not support the trailing separator option 
Associated Keywords. 
WRITE #, PRINT 


386 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


WRITE # 


Write to file. Command 


Use. 


To print the values of a number of expressions to the given file separating them 
by commas and enclosing strings in double quotes. WRITE # puts data to the file 
in a form that INPUT # is able to read back. 


Form. 

WRITE #file-number-expression,[write-list] 

The file-number-expression specifies the file to write to. The file must be open for 
Output or Random Access. 


write-list is: expression[separator expression]* 
where separator may be comma or semi-colon, interchangeably. 


(The / .. J* construct indicates an optional part, which, if present, may be 
repeated any number of times.) 


Notes. 
WRITE # is similar to PRINT # except that: 
— print zones are ignored 
— strings are printed enclosed in double quotes 
— commas are added between the printed items 
— WRITE # does not support the trailing separator option 
— if the file is open for Random Access the record is space filled to 
the record-length—1 before the carriage return is inserted. 


Associated Keywords. 
WRITE, PRINT # 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 387 





ZONE 


Set Print Zone Size. Command 


Use. 

To change the width of the Print Zone used in PRINT, LPRINT and PRINT #. 
Form. 

ZONE integer-expression 

The integer-expression gives the new Print Zone width, and must yield a value in 


the range 1 to 255. 


Notes. 


The default Print Zone width is 15. The width is reset to the default value 
whenever a new program is loaded, that is by NEW, LOAD, CHAIN and RUN 
‘file’ commands. 


Associated Keywords. 
PRINT, LPRINT, PRINT #, WIDTH 


388 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix I 
Initialising BASIC 


When you load BASIC, the command line may include a number of parameters, 
as follows: 


[file-name][ / © : number-of-files][/M:address][/S : size] 


If no parameters are given, BASIC is initialised using default values and enters 
Direct Mode. 


If the file-name parameter is given, it must be the first parameter. When BASIC 
has completed initialisation, the given file is loaded and execution begins 
immediately. 


The other parameters may be given in any order. 


/F: BASIC can handle a limited number of files at once, /F sets this number. 
The number-of-files may be in the range 0...255 (though it may prove 


difficult to find enough memory for more than a hundred files). If no /F: is 
specified, the maximum is set to 3. 


Each file requires approximately 176 bytes of memory plus the buffer 
specified by the /S: setting, unless that buffer is less than 128 bytes, when 
a total of 304 bytes are required. 


/M: Sets the limit on BASIC’s memory use. The address gives the address of 
the last (highest address) byte of memory which may be used by BASIC. 


If no /M: is specified BASIC uses as much memory as it can: 


Mallard-80 takes the value at locations 6 and 7 as the limit of its memory 
use. 


Mallard-86 attempts to get a full 64K byte data area from the host 
operating system. Some of this area is used for BASIC's variables. If a /M: 
limit is specified then any area beyond it in the data segment will not be 
used by BASIC. 


BASIC requires at least 1024 bytes of free space to run at all. 


/S: Sets the maximum size of random records. The size is expressed in bytes. 
If no /S: is specified, 128 is assumed. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 389 





Appendix I; Initialising BASIC 





The various numbers may be unsigned decimal integers (maximum value 65535), 
or may be entered in Octal or Hexadecimal (using &O and &H notation). 


These values may be altered after BASIC is loaded by using the MEMORY and 
CLEAR commands. 


390 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix II 





Error Numbers and 
Error Messages 


All errors generated by BASIC are listed here, in error number order. The 
messages produced by BASIC are given, as well a brief description of possible 
causes. 


1. Ordinary BASIC Errors 


a Unexpected NEXT 


A NEXT command has been encountered while not in a FOR loop, or 
the control variable in the NEXT command does not match that in the 


FOR. 
2 Syntax Error 
3 Unexpected RETURN 


A RETURN command has been encountered when not in a subroutine. 


4 DATA exhausted 
A READ command has attempted to read beyond the end of the last 
DATA, 

5 Improper argument 


This is a general purpose error. The value of a function’s argument, or a 
command parameter is invalid in some way. 


6 Overflow 


The result of an arithmetic operation has overflowed. This may be a 
floating point overflow, in which case some operation has yielded a 
value greater than 1.7E+38 (approx.). Alternatively, this may be the 
result of a failed attempt to change a floating point number to a 16 bit 
signed integer. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 391 


Appendix II; Error Numbers and Error Messages 


q 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


aR) 


Memory full 


The current program or its variables may be simply too big. If the 
control structure is very deeply nested (nested GOSUBs, WHILEs or 
FORs) then the stack may be too small — the CLEAR or MEMORY 
commands allow more stack to be specified. 


If this occurs while editing CLEAR may be able to make more room by 
discarding all variables. 


If this occurs when attempting to lock a record the BUFFERS command 
may be used to increase the maximum number of record locks per file. 
Note that the default maximum is zero. 


Line does not exist 


The line referenced cannot be found. 


Subscript out of range 


One of the subscripts in an array reference is too big or too small. 


Array already dimensioned 


One of the arrays in a DIM statement has already been declared, or an 
OPTION BASE command has been issued again or too late. 


Division by zero 


May occur in floating point division, integer division, integer modulus 
or in exponentiation. 


Invalid direct command 


The last command attempted is not valid in Direct Mode. 


Type mismatch 


A numeric value has been presented where a string value is required. 
and vice versa, or an invalidly formed number has been found in READ 
or INPUT #. 


String space full 


So many strings have been created that there is no further room 
available, even after ‘garbage collection’. 


String too long 


String exceeds 255 characters in length. May be generated by 
concatenating strings. 





392 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix II; Error Numbers and Error Messages 


16 String expression too complex 


String expressions may generate a number of intermediate string values. 
When the number of these values exceeds a reasonable number, BASIC 
gives up and this error results. 


17 Cannot CONTinue 
For one reason or another the current program cannot be restarted using 
CONT. Note that CONT is intended for restarting after a STOP 
command, Control-C or error, and that any alteration of the program in 
the meantime makes a restart impossible. 

18 Unknown user function 


No DEF FEN has been executed for the FN just invoked. 


19 RESUME missing 


The end of the program has been encountered while in Error Processing 
Mode (ie. in an ON ERROR GOTO routine). 


20 Unexpected RESUME 
RESUME is only valid while in Error Processing Mode (ie. in an ON 
ERROR GOTO routine). 

27 O/S dependent error 


The OSERR function will return an operating system dependent value 
which will further identify the error. 


22 Operand missing 
BASIC has encountered an incomplete expression. 
. 23 Line too long 
26 NEXT missing 
BASIC cannot find a NEXT to match a FOR command. 
29 WEND missing 
BASIC cannot find a WEND to match a WHILE command. 





30 Unexpected WEND 


BASIC has encountered a WEND when not in a WHILE loop, or a 
WEND that does not match the current WHILE loop. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 393 


Appendix II: Error Numbers and Error Messages 


2. Disc and File Related Errors 


50 


51 


a2 


ae) 


54 


55 


57 
58 


61 
62 


394 


Record overflow 


Run out of record in a FIELD command, or any command reading or 
writing the random record buffer. 


Internal error 
Any occurrence of this error should be reported. 


File number error 


An out of range file number has been specified, or an attempt has been 
made to read or write a file which is not open. 


File not found 
Unable to open the required file. 


File type error 


A file operation has been attempted which is not consistent with the 
way in which the file was opened. This error also occurs whan BASIC 
is reading what it expects is a program file, but cannot recognise the 
contents. 


File already open 

The file number specified is in use. 

Disc I/O error 

File already exists 

A file with the new name ina NAME or REN command already exists. 


The CREATE Jetsam command will report this error if either the index 
or the data file already exists. 


Dise full 
EOF met 
An attempt has been made to read past the end of a sequential file. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix II: Error Numbers and Error Messages 
63 Record number error 


A record number outside the legal range 1....32767 has been specified, 
or an impossible record number has been used when accessing a keyed 


data file. 
64 File name invalid 
66 Direct command found 


When loading a program file BASIC has encountered a direct 
command. May indicate that the file is an ASCII file generated outside 
BASIC and which is not in a suitable form. 


67 Directory full 


68 Read past EOF 


Can occur on some operating systems if an attempt is made to lock a 
record which has never been written to. 


69 Record is locked 


A GET or PUT operation on a random file record has failed because 
the record is already locked and the existing lock is incompatible with 
the required new lock. 


70 Read-only disc 

It is not possible to write to the disc in question. 
vel Read-only file 

It is not possible to write to the file in question. 
we) Invalid drive 

The drive in question does not exist. 
73 File is locked 


A file lock operation has failed because the file is already locked and 
the existing lock is incompatible with the required new lock. 





74 RESET denied 
The operating system has rejected a disc reset command. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 395 


Appendix II: Error Numbers and Error Messages 


3. Jetsam Specific Error Numbers 


The following errors are specific to Jetsam: 


11S 


114 


115 


396 


Not a keyed file 


When OPENing a keyed file Jetsam has not recognised the header 
records of either the data and or the index file. 


Record is not locked 


An attempt has been made to GET or PUT a record which is not 
adequately locked. 


Inconsistent files 


When OPENing a keyed file Jetsam has found that the data and index 
files are marked inconsistent. This indicates that for some reason the 
keyed file was not CLOSEd or CONSOLIDATEd after it was last 
written to. The keyed file is not usable, and the user should turn to the 
latest back-up copy. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix II 





External Routines 


Commands exist to invoke external machine language routines. Two forms of 
routine are supported — USR Functions and CALLed Subroutines. 


BASIC requires external routines to be loaded into machine memory outside the 
area used by the BASIC. With Mallard-80 this is typically above the highest 
address used by BASIC. Mallard-86 allows the routines to be located in their own 
segment, or to use memory in BASIC's data segment above the highest address 
used by BASIC. The highest address used by BASIC may be set by the /M: load 
time option (see Appendix I) or by the CLEAR and MEMORY commands. 


1. Data Formats 


This is a brief description of the format of the four data types. All are held with 
the least significant byte first (at the lowest address). 


Integer. Two’s complement 16 bit values. 


String. Strings are held in two parts, the String Descriptor and the String Body. 
The String Descriptor is a three byte vector. The least significant byte gives the 
length of the string, zero implies the string is null and that the rest of the 
descriptor should be ignored. The next two bytes give the machine address of the 
string body. (In Mallard-86 the body of the string is in BASIC’s Data Segment). 


Single Length. A three byte mantissa followed by a one byte exponent. Numbers 
are always held normalised, and the most significant bit of the mantissa is 
replaced by the sign. The exponent is biased by 128. A zero exponent means that 
the number is zero, and the mantissa should be ignored. The mantissa is in sign 
and magnitude form with the binary point to the left of the implied most 
significant bit. The first byte of the mantissa is the least significant byte. 


Double Length. As single length, but with four more bytes of mantissa. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 397 





Appendix III: External Routines 


2. USR Functions 


Ten names are reserved for external functions. They are USRO to USR9. The DEF 
USR command declares the address of an external function and assigns it to the 
given USR name. USR functions are invoked in the usual way and take one 
parameter, which may be of any type. The function must return a value, which 
may either be of the same type as the parameter or of Integer type. 


The entry conditions of the function are as follows: 


Mallard-80: the A register indicates the type of the parameter: 


2 => 
3 => 
4 => 
8 => 


Integer Parameter 
HL register pair contains the address of a 16 bit 2's complement value. 


String Parameter 

DE register pair contains the address of the string descriptor (as 
described above). 

Single Length Parameter 

HL register pair contains the address of the four byte single length 
number. 

Double Length Parameter 


HL register pair contains the address of byte 4 of the eight byte double 
length number (where the first byte is byte 0). 


Mallard-86: the AL register indicates the type of the parameter: 


2 => 
3 => 
4 => 


398 


Integer Parameter 
BX register pair contains the address of a 16 bit 2's complement value. 


String Parameter 

DX register pair contains the address of the string descriptor (as 
described above). 

Single Length Parameter 


BX register pair contains the address of the four byte single length 
number. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix III; External Routines 


8 => Double Length Parameter 


BX register pair contains the address of byte 4 of the eight byte double 
length number (where the first byte is byte 0). 


All addresses refer to locations in BASIC's Data Segment. See below for 
a description of the segment register settings. 


The state of other registers (except segment registers) is undefined. 


Note that there is limited stack available, so functions with large stack 
requirements should have their own stack area. 


The exit conditions are: 
All registers and flags, except segment registers, may be corrupted. 


Either: A value of the same type as the original returned in the area occupied 
by the parameter. 


Or: An Integer value retumed using the RETURN_INTEGER subroutine (see 
below). 


While USR functions may take a String parameter and return a String value, the 
function may not alter the String Descriptor in any way. 


It is expected that USR functions will, in general, require Integer parameters and 
return Integer values. Two routines are provided by BASIC to support this pattern 
of use. They are: 


GET_INTEGER 


Force the parameter to an Integer, rounding floating point numbers. Fails if 
the parameter is a string. (Equivalent to CINT). 


Entry conditions: 
The parameter has not been altered. 


Exit conditions: 
Mallard-80: HL contains the Integer value of the parameter 
Mallard-86: BX contains the Integer value of the parameter 
Other registers (except for segment registers) and flags corrupt 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 399 





Appendix III: External Routines 


RETURN_INTEGER 
Set the value to be returned by the function to be the Integer given. 


Entry conditions: 
Mallard-80: HL contains the Integer value to be returned 
Mallard-86: BX contains the Integer value to be returned 


Exit conditions: 
Mallard-80: register A and flags corrupt 
Mallard-80: register AL and flags corrupt 
Other registers preserved 


In Mallard-80 the addresses of these two routines appear within the BASIC 
interpreter at the following locations: 

GET_INTEGER 259 Decimal 103 Hexadecimal 
RETURN_INTEGER: 261 Decimal 105 Hexadecimal 

In Mallard-86 the routines may be invoked by a FAR CALL to the following 
locations in the BASIC interpreter: 

GET_INTEGER 259 Decimal 103 Hexadecimal 
RETURN_INTEGER: 263 Decimal 107 Hexadecimal 


3. CALLed Subroutines 


The CALL command specifies the address of the subroutine, optionally followed 
by a list of parameters. The address may only be specified by the value of a 
variable — ie. not by an expression. The parameters may only be variables — they 
may not be expressions. (Note that this includes variables which are array items.) 


Parameters are passed by reference, that is the address of the value of each 
parameter is passed (in the case of a String, the value is the String Descriptor). 
The number and type of parameters must be agreed between the BASIC program 
and the subroutine — there is no checking. If possible the addresses are passed in 
registers, otherwise they are passed in an area of memory. 


For Mallard-80 the entry conditions are: 


If there are 3 or fewer parameters: 


HL contains the address of parameter 1 (if any) 
DE contains the address of parameter 2 (if any) 
BC contains the address of parameter 3 (if any) 





400 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix III: External Routines 


If there are 4 or more parameters: 


HL contains the address of parameter 1 

DE contains the address of parameter 2 

BC contains the address of an area of memory containing the 
addresses of the other parameters, thus: 


2 byte address of parameter n high address 


address of parameter 4 
address of parameter 3 low address 


BC contains the address of the less significant byte of the address of 
parameter 3. 


For Mallard-86 the entry conditions are: 
Stack: 2 byte address of parameter 1 high address 


address of parameter 2 


address of parameter n 
BASIC’s Code Segment 
return offset low address 


The SP register points at the less significant byte of the return offset. 
Parameters may be referenced using suitable BP relative addressing modes. All 
addresses refer to locations in BASIC’s Data Segment. 


See below for a description of the segment register state. 
The contents of other registers (except segment registers) are undefined. 
The exit conditions are: 

All registers (except segment registers) and flats corrupt. 


Since parameters are passed by reference it is possible for the subroutine to return 
values. Access to variables is as described previously, for USR routines. New 
String values may be returned provided that the subroutine does not alter the 
String Descriptor in any way. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 401 


Appendix III: External Routines 


4. Mallard-86 and Segment Registers 


When either a USR or a CALLed external routine is called Mallard-86 uses a 
FAR CALL. The offset of the address called is given by the appropriate DEF 
USR and by the value of the variable in the CALL statement. The segment base 
used is that last set by DEF SEG (the default segment is BASIC's data segment). 
When the routine is entered the value at the top of stack is the ‘far return’ to 
BASIC. The segment registers are set up: 


CS: asset in the latest DEF SEG (or BASIC's data segment if none) 
SS: BASIC's data segment 
DS: BASIC's data segment 
ES: BASIC's data segment 


All addresses of parameters are offsets within BASIC's data segment. To use 
either the GET_INTEGER or the RETURN_INTEGER the routine must create a 
‘far address’ by picking BASIC’s code segment from the stack and using the 
offset given above. 


If any segment registers are modified in an external routine they MUST be 
restored to their entry values before the routine returns. 


402 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix IV 
BASIC Keywords 


The following are the BASIC keywords. They are reserved and cannot be used as 
variable names. 


ABS, ADDKEY, ADDREC, ALL, AND, AS, ASC, ATN, AUTO 
BASE, BUFFERS 


CALL, CD, CDBL, CHAIN, CHDIR, CHDIR$, CHR$, CINT, CLEAR, CLOSE, 
COMMON, CONSOLIDATE, CONT, COS, CREATE, CSNG, CVD, CVI, 
CVIK, CVS, CVUK 


DATA, DEC$, DEF, DEFDBL, DEFINT, DEF SEG, DEFSNG, DEFSTR, DEL, 
DELETE, DELKEY, DIM, DIR, DISPLAY 


EDIT, ELSE, END, EOF, EQV, ERA, ERASE, ERL, ERR, ERROR, EXP 


FETCHKEY$, FETCHRANK, FETCHREC, FIELD, FILES, FINDS, 
FINDDIR$, FIX, FN, FOR, FRE 


GET, GOSUB, GOTO 

HEX$, HIMEM 

IF, IMP, INKEY$, INP, INPUT, INPUT #, INPUT$, INPW, INSTR, INT 
KILL 


LEFT$, LEN, LET, LINE, LIST, LLIST, LOAD, LOC, LOCK, LOF, LOG, 
LOG10, LOWER$, LPOS, LPRINT, LSET 


MAX, MD, MEMORY, MERGE, MID$, MIN, MKD$, MKDIR, MKI$, MKIK$, 
MKS$, MKUK$, MOD 


NAME, NEXT, NEW, NOT 
OCT$, ON, ON ERROR GOTO 0, OPEN, OPTION, OR, OSERR, OUT, OUTW 
PEEK, POKE, POS, PRINT, PRINT #, PUT 


RANDOMIZE, RANKSPEC, RD, READ, REM, REN, RENUM, RESET, 
RESTORE, RESUME, RESUME 0, RETURN, RIGHTS, RMDIR, RND, 
ROUND, RSET, RUN 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 403 





Appendix IV: BASIC Keywords 


SAVE, SEEKKEY, SEEKNEXT, SEEKPREV, SEEKRANK, SEEKREC, 
SEEKSET, SGN, SIN, SPACE$, SPC, SQR, STEP, STOP, STR$, STRING$, 
STRIP$, SWAP, SYSTEM 


TAB, TAN, THEN, TO, TROFF, TRON, TYPE 

UNT, UPPERS, USING, USR 

VAL, VARPTR, VERSION 

WAIT, WAITW, WEND, WHILE, WIDTH, WRITE, WRITE # 
XOR 

ZONE 





404 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix V 


& 


Hints on the Use of Jetsam and 
Multiuser Facilities 





1. Numeric Keys 


Jetsam keys are strings. DEC$ may be used to create a suitable ASCII string for 
numeric keys. Jetsam works faster with short keys than it does with longer keys. 
The expansion of numeric keys to ASCII strings should be avoided if possible. 
For integral values, the following are recommended: 


i. for values in the range 0...255. 
Use CHR$(x%) to produce a 1 byte string. 

ii. for values in the range —32768 to + 32767 (ie. Integer) 
Use MKIK$(x%) to produce a 2 byte string. 

iii. for values in the range 0...65535 (ie. Unsigned Integer) 
Use MKUK$(x) to produce a 2 byte string. 


It is well worthwhile transforming numeric key values into one of the above 
integer ranges to minimise key sizes. 


If fractional key values must be used then DEC$ is the only practical solution (but 
note that negative numbers require special treatment). Neither of the functions 
MKD$ and MKS$ produce strings of a suitable form. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 405 


Appendix V: Hints on the Use of Jetsam and Multiuser Facilities 


2. Sequential Processing of Keyed Files in 
a Multiuser Environment 


The following fragment of code will step on to the next record and lock it while 

processing a file sequentially: 

10 previous. records% = FETCHREC (#file.number’) 

20 return.codet = SEEKNEXT(#file.number%, 1) 

30 IF previous.record’<>0 THEN IF LOCK(#file.number%, 0, 
previous.record%’ THEN STOP 

40 IF return.code% 

The procedure is to find the current record number; step to the next record and 

(read) lock it: and then unlock the old current record (if the position was set) — 

this operation must succeed so STOP is a suitable action if it fails! 


Assuming the current record is locked when the fragment is entered, this 
procedure will avoid any problems with the current position being deleted 
because the move to the next record and lock is done before unlocking the old 
position. 


Alternatively the following: 
10 IF FETCHREC(#file.number%)<>O0 THEN IF 

LOCK (#file.number%, oom FETCHREC (#file.number%))THEN STOP 
20 return.code$ = SEEKNEXT (#file.number%, 1) 
30 IF return.code% 
will also work, but if the old position is deleted between unlocking it and moving 
to the next record, a return code of 105 will be generated by the SEEKNEXT. 


3. Sub-Keys 


Some sorting systems work with a primary key and a variable number of sub- 
keys. If records with equal primary keys are found then the first sub-keys are 
used to establish the ordering. If the first sub-keys are also equal then the second 
are used, and so on. Jetsam does not support such a scheme. The ranks in Jetsam 
do not constitute sub-keys, the keys in one rank are quite independent of keys in 
any other rank. 


406 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix V: Hints on the Use of Jetsam and Multiuser Facilities 


To achieve the same effect as a primary and sub-keys system the program must 
create a single Jetsam key by concatenating the required application level keys. 
This is straightforward if the application’s keys are fixed length strings, for 
example: 


10 IF ADDREC #file.number%, 0, rank%, 
MKIKS (date%) +MKIKS (invoice%) ) THEN PRINT "ADDREC FAILED" 


will insert a new record which is sorted into the index by date and invoice 
number. If the application's keys are not fixed length they may be separated by a 
CHR$(0), for example: 


10 IF ADDREC (#file.number%,0,rank%, 
surname$+CHR$ (0) +initials$) THEN PRINT "ADDREC FAILED" 


will insert a new record which is sorted into the index file by surname and initials. 


4. Straightforward Multiuser Random 
File Handling 


The Temporary Record Write Lock described in Section 8.3.4 is designed to 
simplify conversion of existing random file processing programs. Programs 
which read one record at a time, process it and, perhaps, then write it back do not 
require any explicit record locking, because BASIC automatically applies a write 
lock. Only the OPEN need be modified, to open the file unlocked, because the 
default is to open it write locked. 


If this mechanism is used it is important to recognise its limitation, which is that 
only one record, the last one read, is locked. Programs which require the contents 
of more than one record to remain unchanged while one or more of them is 
processed will require explicit locks on all the records in question. 


5. Guard Record 


A dummy, or guard, record may be used by the application to control access to 
the file in ways not provided by the built-in record and file lock mechanisms. The 
following example is for a keyed file, but the technique applies equally to random 
files. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 407 





Appendix V: Hints on the Use of Jetsam and Multiuser Facilities 





To control access to a complete rank of keys, the application could create a 
dummy record in the rank and use the following fragments of code: 


10 REM To gain non-exclusive access to a rank 
20 return.code% = SEEKKEY (#file.number%,1, rank%,") 
30 IF return.code%<>0 THEN 


90 IF LOCK (#file.number%, 0, FETCHREC (#file.numberS) ) 


THEN STOP 
and: 
10 REM To gain exclusive access to a rank. 
20 return. code%=SEEKKEY (#file.number%, 2, rank%,") 


30 IF return.code%<>0 THEN 


90 IF LOCK (#file.number%,0,FETCHREC (#file.number$) ) 
THEN STOP 


The successful application of a read lock in the first fragment allows other shared 
access to the rank for which the record is the guard. Similarly the application of 
the write lock in the second fragment gains exclusive access. 


A guard record with similar fragments of code may be used to control access to 
any part or all of a random or a keyed file. 


408 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix VI 


Installation of BASIC 


The Installation procedure allows the following to be set: 
a. Whether to use the screen based or the command driven line editor. 
b. The screen control characters and sequences for the screen based line editor. 


c. The keyboard control characters and sequences for the screen based line 
editor. ; 


d. The console width and Auto CRLF position. 
e. The space compression feature (see Section 2.2). 


By default, the command line editor is enabled, the console width and Auto 
CRLF positions are both set to 80, and the space compression feature is enabled. 


Full BASICs include a "screen based line editor". This presents the line being 
edited on one or more screen lines. The user is allowed to move the cursor within 
the line and add or remove characters. The editor updates the display each time 
the line is changed so that the latest version is always visible. 


To achieve the screen based editing the BASIC used a small number of screen 
cursor movement commands and needs some knowledge of the screen with which 
it is being used. BASIC contains a table with this information in it. The keystroke 
sequences for the editor commands are not fixed, but are also contained in a table 
in BASIC. 


The Install program is provided for the user to set up these tables so that BASIC 
may be made compatible with the screen and keyboard with which it is to be 
used. Some versions of BASIC are supplied fully installed for a particular 
computer. In these versions the installation program is not supplied. 


Versions of Mallard BASIC supplied specifically for an IBM PC (or PC 
compatible) or for one of the Amstrad range of computers are fully installed for 
use on these machines. 


Run Only BASICs do not include the line editor, and do not require any 
installation, except to set the console width and Auto CRLF position, if these are 
not both 80. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 409 





Appendix VI: Installation of BASIC 





1. Screen Requirements 


The editor requires a screen with the following cursor facilities: 
— Move the cursor one position to the left (not character delete). 
— Move the cursor one position to the right. 
— Move the cursor down one line, scroll up if necessary. 
— Move the cursor up one line. 
— Move the cursor to the start of the current screen line. 


In general BASIC expects to invoke the cursor commands by sending a control 
character with up to four parameter characters. The form of these control 
character sequences is set into BASIC’s tables by the Install program. On the 
IBM PC, PC-DOS tends not to support control codes of this sort so the screen 
must be driven directly. The Install program includes an option to enable an IBM 
PC screen driver. 


The editor also needs to know how wide the screen is and what effect writing a 
character to the last column of the screen has. Many screens automatically 
perform line feed and carriage return (Auto CRLF) after a character is written to 
the last column. The WIDTH command may be used to set the width of the 
screen and to declare the column at which Auto CRLF occurs (if any). 


2. Keyboard Commands for the Editor 


The commands obeyed by the Editor are described in Chapter 4. Each command 
may be invoked by a unique sequence of up to three characters. It is expected that 
the first character of a sequence will be a control character (value &H7F or in the 
range &HO00...&H1F). The commands and a possible set up are as follows: 


Cursor Left Control-S 

Cursor Right Control-D 

Cursor Up Control-E 

Cursor Down Control-X 

Find Character Control-L 
Insert/Overstrike Toggle Control-V 
Forwards delete Control-G 

Backwards delete Rub Out (value &H7F) 
Delete to character Control-K 

Complete the Edit Carriage Return (Control-M) 
Abandon editing Control-C 





410 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix VI: Installation of BASIC 





3. The Install Program 


The Install program is written in BASIC and-may be run by the Mallard BASIC 
with which it is supplied. The program is intended to be straightforward to use 
and includes a certain amount of help information. Any machine running Mallard 
BASIC can install Mallard BASIC for any other machine. The Install program 
writes into BASIC’s tables the following: 


— The default screen width and Auto CRLF position. 

— Whether or not the editor is enabled. 

— The screen cursor command control sequences or the screen driver. 

— Editor command keystrokes to be recognised. 
These details can be entered manually or loaded from a file. The program has a 
‘book’ of parameters for common screen types, which the user may add to. 
The following facilities are also provided: 


— Saving the installation details into a file in a form that can be reloaded if 
required. 


| 


Loading the installation details from a file. 
— Output of the installation details to a printer in a readable form. 


Testing the installation details for internal consistency. 


Trying the keystrokes and the screen commands. 


4. Running Install 


Before running Install, it is a good safety precaution to make a back-up copy of 
the disc on which Mallard BASIC was supplied. Your operating system user 
guide should explain how to do this. Then proceed to install one copy, keeping 
the other safe in case of disaster! 


Load your operating system as usual, then replace the disc in Drive A with your 
BASIC disc. Remember to let the operating system know you have changed the 
disc if your operating system requires this. 


Now enter BASIC as normal by typing: 


MALLARD 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 411 





Appendix VI: Installation of BASIC 


After the Ok prompt type: 
DIR MALLARD. * 


The screen will then show a filename, probably MALLARD.COM or 
MALLARD.CMD. This is the filename of the main BASIC interpreter. 
Remember it, as the installation process will need it. 


The Ok prompt will be displayed. Now type: 
RUN "INSTALL" 


to run the installation program. During this program you will be prompted for 


information. Always type the information followed by (RETAN). First, a copyright 
message will appear, followed by the question: 


Which file do you wish to install? 


Type the filename of the BASIC interpreter that you displayed just now. You will 
then get a message asking you if this is correct. Type Y it it is and N if not. 


The copyright messages and identification of the BASIC to be installed will then 
be displayed. Check that this is what you expected and confirm that it is correct. 


The installation program’s main menu is the displayed. 


start again 

select standard terminal 

customise your teminal 

print installation details 

space compression ON/OFF ON 

editor ON/OFF OFF 

install changes into MALLARD.xxx, then exit to system 


~ HOU BR WDNP 


exit to system without installing the changes 


To use the screen based line editor, first choose option 6 by typing 6 and type ON 
to turn on the editor you are going to install. You should also decide at this stage 
if you want space compression on or off. We recommend ON for program 
development. 


Now install the editor by giving details of you terminal. These details are already 
set up for a number of standard terminal types. Select option 2 to list the 
possibilities in the form of a menu. (Note that the terminal type menu may be 
more than one screenful: type M to see the next screen.) If your computer is not 
listed, you can either try selecting one you believe to be similar and see if it 
works, or you can leave the terminal type menu (by typing X) and select option 3 
to customise BASIC for your terminal. 


412 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix VI: Installation of BASIC 


The menu that appears if you opt to customise BASIC contains two choices — 
customise keyboard and customise VDU. These offer you further menus of 
features you must set, using the information supplied in the manual for your 
computer. In particular, the customise keyboard menu asks which keys will be 
used to perform the various editing functions. The eariest way to answer these 
questions is just to press the appropriate key, followed by (RETRY). If you are in 
any doubt, both menus have a help option which explains the details in full. 


Having chosen a standard terminal or customised BASIC to your computer, 
simply type X to leave menus until you return to the main menu. Then choose 
option I to install BASIC on the disc. 


If you decide against installing any changes, type X. 


If later you have any problems, or discover that the installation isn’t quite right, 
you can always run INSTALL again and make the necessary corrections. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 413 





Appendix VI: Installation of BASIC 





414 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix VII 
The Command Editor 





The command editor is available in all versions of Mallard BASIC except Run Only 
versions. 


It is machine independent and does not require any installation. To achieve this it 
firstly does not attempt to show the complete up to date state of the line beng edited, 
and secondly uses the minimum of control codes as commands. 


The command editor is always in one of three modes - Command mode, Insert mode 
or Overstrike mode: 


Command mode All keystrokes are interpreted as editor commands. 


Insert mode Any legal characters typed are inserted into the line at the current 
line position and displayed at the current cursor position. Any characters to the 
right of the current line position are moved to the right, but this in not shown on 
the screen. If the line is full any attempt to add a character will cause a bleep, and 
the character will be discarded. 


A restricted number of control codes are accepted and acted on. 


Overstrike mode Any legal characters typed are entered into the line replacing 
the character at the current line position and displayed at the current cursor 
position. If the current line position is at the end of the line characters are inserted 
as in Insert mode. 


A restricted number of control codes are accepted and acted on. 


When the command editor is invoked the initial contents, if any, of the line to be 
edited are displayed and the cursor placed at the start of the following screen line. If 
the line to be edited is not completely empty a prompt is displayed. The editor then 
starts in Insert mode if the line to be edited is empty, or empty apart from a line 
number, otherwise it starts in Command mode. The editor may be invoked: 


© byanEDIT command or a syntax error 
during AUTO when an existing line is found 
by Control-A in Direct Mode when the previous line was a program line 


The line number is displayed as a prompt. The editor starts in Command 
mode. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 415 





Appendix VII; The Command Editor 





e during AUTO where the line does not exist 
by Control-A when the previous line contained only a line number 


The line number is displayed as a prompt. The editor starts in Insert mode. 


e by Control-A when the previous line was not empty but did not start with a 
line number 


The string '? ' is displayed as a prompt. The editor starts in Command 
mode. 
e in Direct mode with an empty line 


No prompt is given. The editor starts in Insert mode. 


WARNING 


Both the move left and the backwards delete commands attempt to keep the display 
in step with the current line by sending backspaces and spaces to the console. This 
may fail if the edited line is displayed on more than one console line, or if backslashes 
and edited characters have been displayed by the ‘D’, ‘H’ or ‘K’ commands. In this 
case the console does not show the current state of the line so backspacing over it may 
be misleading. The user is advised to use the “L’ command to re-display the line and 
position the cursor at the start, after the line number (if any). 


1. Control Code Commands Obeyed in all Modes 


The following control codes are treated as commands in all modes: 

Carriage Return Finish editing. 

(&HOD) The rest of the line after the current position is displayed. 
The line is then acted upon. 

Escape (&H1B) Enter Command mode. 


Control-C (&H03) Abandon editing. 


The Break message is displayed. The line is not acted upon, 
but the current contents are not discarded (so may be re- 
edited if Control-A is then entered). 


416 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix VII; The Command Editor 





2. Commands Only Available in Command Mode 


Space (&H20) 


Rubout (&H7F) or 
Backspace (&H08) 


Borb 


Dord 


Horh 


lori 


Kork 


Move forward one character in the current line. 


If the current position is at the end of the line then the position 
is not changed and a Bell (&H07) is sent to the console. 
Otherwise, the editor sends the current character to the console 
and moves to the next character in the current line. 


Move back one character in the current line. 


If the current position is at the start of the line then the position 
is not changed and a Bell (&H07) is sent to the console. 
Otherwise, the editor sends a Backspace (& H08) to the console 
and moves to the previous character in the current line. 


Backwards delete. 


If the current position is at the start of the line then the position 
is not changed and a Bell (&H07) is sent to the console. 
Otherwise, the editor sends Backspace (&H08), Space 
(&H20), Backspace (&H08) to the console and removes the 
previous character in the current line. 


Forwards delete. 


If the current position is at the end of the line then the position 
is not changed and a Bell (&H07) is sent to the console. 
Otherwise, the editor sends the current character to the console 
enclosed in backslash characters and removes it from the 
current line. 


Delete to the end of the line and enter Insert mode. 
All characters deleted are displayed enclosed in backslashes. 


Enter Insert mode. 


Delete to character. 


This command deletes all characters up to, but not including, 
the first occurrence of the character typed following the ‘K’ or 
‘k’. The character at the current position is not included in the 
search, so it is always deleted. All characters deleted are 
displayed enclosed in backslashes. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 417 





Appendix VII: The Command Editor 





Lorl List the current line. 
Restarts the editor with the current line. This is useful because 
restarting the editor will cause the current line to be displayed. 
Ooro Enter Overstrike mode. 


Sors Search for character. 
This command moves forward to the first occurrence of the 
character typed following the ‘S’ or ‘s’. The character at the 
current position is not included in the search, so is always 
moved past. All characters moved past are sent to the console. 


X or x Extend the current line. 


The current position is moved to the end of the line and the 
editor enters Insert mode. All characters moved past are sent to 
the console. 


3. Legal Characters in Insert and Overstrike Modes 


The following characters are accepted as text and may be entered into a line in 
either Insert or Overstrike mode: 


— Tab (&H09) Tabs are displayed as spaces to the next tab position 
— Line Feed (& HOA) Line Feeds are displayed as Carriage Return (& HOD) followed 
by Line Feed (& HOA). 


— ASCII printing characters in the range &H20...&H7E. 
— Additional characters in the range &H80...&HFF. 


As well as the control codes given in Section 4.3.1 above, Backspace (&H08) and 
Rubout (&H7F) are obeyed in Insert and Overstrike modes as follows: 


— Insert mode Backwards delete. 
If the current position is at the start of the line then the 
position is not changed and a Bell (&H07) is sent to the 
console. Otherwise, the editor sends Backspace (&H08), 
Space (&H20), Backspace (&H08) to the console and 
removes to the previous character in the current line. 


— Overstrike mode Move back one character in the current line. 


If the current position is at the start of the line, the position 
is not changed and a Bell (&H07) is sent to the console. 
Otherwise, the editor sends a Backspace (&H08) to the 
console and moves to the previous character in the line. 


418 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix VII: The Command Editor 





Any attempt to enter a control character (in the range &H00...&HIF) other than one 
of those mentioned above (including in Section 1) will be rejected, the character will 
be ignored and a Bell (&H07) sent to the console. 


4. Assumptions Made About the Console 
The command editor sends a small number of control codes to the console. These 
codes are assumed to have effect as follows: 


— sending Carriage Return, Line Feed (& HOD, & HOA) is expected to move the 
cursor to the start of the next console line. 


— sending Backspace (&H08) is expected to move the cursor back one character 
position, without deleting the character. If the cursor is already at the lefthand 
edge of the console then either the cursor should not move, or it should move 
to the end of the previous console line. 


— sending a Bell (&HO07) is expected to produce some sort of warning noise. 


These are the generally accepted meanings of these control codes. 








Mallard BASIC: Reference 419 


Appendix VII: The Command Editor 





420 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix VIII 
ASCII Character Set 


The following table shows the US ASCII character set assumed in this manual. 


While most computers use an ASCII character set, there are often subtle variations 
in the character used at certain points in the table. In particular, BASIC assumes that 
the character with internal value &H23 is #, whereas it will be £ if the UK ASCII 
character set is being used. Other national language variants have further differences 
and output on your printer can also be affected. The characters which you can expect 
to be affected are shown shaded below. Of these, #, \and “ have special meaning to 
BASIC (described elsewhere in this manual). When including these characters in 
BASIC commands, substitute the corresponding character from your computer's 


character set. 
0 | 16 | 32 | 48 | 64 | 80 | 96 | 112 


fi EAE 


m 
Q| x 
m 2] z 
3] 2/8 | 8 | 
a =| | | | 
EREE 


ce] 
> 
a 


m 
1) 
Qa 


Pele 
lA 
ae 


~— = o 


= 


= 
a > 





a wo > 
fe{s|s| 3] s|s{slels| 32 
Bo 
Ee 
a 


Ce D fo) n 
ind 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 421 





Appendix VIII: ASCII Character Set 





422 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix IX 
Trigonometrical functions 


Arange of trigonometrical functions can be derived from BASIC’s built-in functions 
Expressions for the commonest of these are given below. 


Important: These formulae should be used with care, because in a number of cases, 
there are values of x for which the formula is not valid. These are noted in the table 
(machine precision value of 7). 


Function Equivalent formula Invalid values of x 
SEC(x) 1/COS(x) n/2, 37/2 etc. 
COSEC(x) 1/SIN(x) 0, 1, 27 etc. 
COT(x) 1/TAN(x) 0, 7, 27 etc. 
SINH(x) (EXP(x)-EXP(-x))/2 

COSH(x) (EXP(x)+EXP(-x))/2 

TANH(x) (EXP(—x)/EXP(x)+EXP(-x))*2+1 

SECH(x) 2/(EXP(x)+EXP(-x)) 

COSECH(x) = 2/(EXP(x)-EXP(-x)) x= 0 
COTH(x) EXP(-x)/(EXP(x)-EXP(-x))*2+1 x=0 
SIN“(x) ATN(x/SQR(-x*x+1)) x=+1 
COS"(x) —ATN(x/SQR(-x*x+1))+7/2 xe tl 
SEC1(x) ATN(x/SQR(x*x-1))+SGN(SGN(x)-1)*2/2, x = +1 
COSEC™(x) ATN(x/SQR(x*x—1))4+(SGN(x)-1)*2/2 x=+1 
COT-(x) ATN(x)+1/2 


SINH-1(x) LOG(k+SQR(x*x+1)) 

COSH="(x) LOG(x+SQR(x*x-1)) 

TANH-1(x) LOG((1+x)/(1-x))/2 

SECH™(x) LOG((SQR(-x*x+1)+41)/x 
COSECH"(x) LOG((SGN(x)*SQR(x*x+1)+1)/x) 
COTH-(x) LOG((x+1)/(x-1))/2 


- oo = 





~ «eK OM 
ll 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 423 


Appendix IX: Trigonometrical functions 


424 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix X 





Binary Floating Point 
Arithmetic 


Mallard BASIC uses Binary Floating Point Arithmetic when dealing with values 
with fractional parts. This Appendix describes some of the properties of floating 
point arithmetic in general, and binary floating point in particular. Some effects of 
binary floating point surprise some users, and may need to be taken into account 
even in simple programs. Other effects will only be of interest in numerically 
intensive programs. 


All floating point arithmetic systems have some limit to the precision to which 
values are held and new values generated. For many purposes the error involved 
causes no ill effects. A badly constructed program can, however, result in 
dangerous magnification of the intrinsic errors. There is a complete branch of 
mathematics — Numerical Analysis — concerned with the construction of accurate 
numerical algorithms. This appendix can only touch on some of the issues 
involved. If in doubt, the programmer should consult an expert. 


This Appendix has a number of sections, as follows : 


1. Floating Point Arithmetic, a Brief Introduction. 


This section describes how floating point values are stored and operated on. 
The source and effect of the (small) errors implicit in floating point arithmetic 
are examined. This is offered as ‘background material’, to support the more 
specific recommendations given in later sections. 


2. Decimal Fractions and Binary Floating Point. 
This section describes the effects of using binary floating point numbers to 
represent decimal fractions. Mallard BASIC uses this technique, and the 
effects affect most users. 

3. Binary Floating Point and Financial Calculations. 
This section contains specific recommendations for programs performing 
calculations on money values. 

4. Binary Floating Point and Scientific/Engineering Calculations. 


This section contains specific recommendations for programs celia 
calculations in scientific or engineering applications. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 425 





Appendix X: Binary Floating Point Arithmetic 





1. Floating Point Arithmetic, 
a Brief Introduction 


The analysis of the source and effects of errors in sequences of floating point 
operations is a non-trivial task. If in doubt the programmer’s simplest option is to 
use double length arithmetic at all times. Note that this really only postpones the 
problems — though, with the exception of the subtraction of very similar values, this 
postponement will usually be indefinite. 


Floating point arithmetic is a very powerful tool, but like many such tools it should 
be used with care. The examples given are, perhaps, a little extreme. They are 
intended to illustrate the potential problems, they are not intended to alarm. 


Floating Point Number Representation 


Floating point numbers have two parts, a ‘significand’ (or ‘mantissa’) and an 
‘exponent’. The significand is usually either a fraction, or a units digit plus a 
fraction . The exponent gives the power of the ‘radix’ to multiply the significand 
by, to give the actual value. In a decimal floating point system (ie. one where the 
radix is 10) a value is represented by: 


significand x 10**Ppo™" 
The significand will have a restricted number of digits, which dictates the precision 
to which any number can be held. The size of the exponent will also be limited, 
which limits the range of values which can be represented. 


For example, consider a decimal system with six digit significands, in which the 
significand is units plus fraction. Some values, chosen more or less at random, and 
their floating point representations are: 


299,792,5 12.0537 2.99793 x 108 
3.1415926535897932 3.14159 x 10° 
0.0000453999297 4.53999 x 10°5 


The exponent value is chosen such that the significand is always at least 1, but less 
than 10. This means that no matter how big or small the number, the number of 
significant digits (the precision) is always the same — it is this property of floating 
point numbers which makes them so useful. Note also that the floating point 
representation is not exact, but it is rounded to the nearest value possible in the 
digits available. 





426 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix X: Binary Floating Point Arithmetic 





Binary floating point systems are no different, except that the radix is 2 and the 
significand is a binary fraction or one plus a binary fraction. In Mallard the 
significands are fractions greater than or equal to a 2 and less than 1. The single and 
double precision numbers have significands of 24 binary digits and 56 binary 
digits, respectively, giving approximately 7 and 16 significant decimal digits. 


The floating point representation of a given number x may be written: 
x X (1+€) 

where € is the relative error introduced when rounding the true value to the 

available precision, and xxe is the actual error. In Mallard the maximum relative 

error in single precision is +2-%4 (approximately +6.0 x 10-®), in double precision 

the maximum relative error is +2-°° (approximately +1.4 x 10°’). [The relative 

error is (actual value — true value) divided by the true value.] 


* 


Floating Point Multiplication and Division 


In multiplication the significands are multiplied together and the exponents are 
added. The multiplication produces twice as many significant digits as in each 
argument. In division the significands are divided and the exponents subtracted. 
The division may produce an indefinite number of significant digits. In both cases 
it is necessary to round the result to the number of digits available for the 
significand. 

Given values x and y to be multiplied together the operation is: 

(x x (1+€,)) x (y x (14, )) 


where ¢, and ¢, are the relative errors introduced by rounding the true values to the 
floating point representations. The result is : 

(xxy X (1 + €, + €, + €,xe, )) x (I+e, ) 
where ¢, is the relative error introduced by the rounding of the result. Since the 
relative errors are very small, second and third order errors (any term involving an 
error multiplied by another) may be ignored, giving: 

xxy X (l+eé€,+€,+€,) 
The three errors are of similar size, so the result may contain an error three times as 
large as the original errors. Some of the errors may be negative, so they may 
combine favourably. Proper error analysis must, however, assume worst case 
errors. In Mallard the maximum relative error in single precision is +2-% so three 
times that is still not a large error. In double precision the maximum relative error is 
+2-57 so even several multiples of it is still vanishingly small. 


Similar analysis can be applied to division. 


Mallard BASIC: Reference 427 





Appendix X: Binary Floating Point Arithmetic 


The operation on the exponents can yield a value which is beyond the range 
available. If the resulting exponent is greater than the largest positive exponent 
possible, then the number is simply too big to be represented — this is called 
Overflow. Generally the floating point system will have a value to represent all 
numbers which are too large to represent, which is often known as ‘machine 
infinity’. In the event of overflow Mallard produces an error message and returns 
the largest representable number. If the resulting exponent is less than the most 
negative exponent possible, then the number is too small to be represented — this is 
called Underflow. Mallard does not take any special steps to deal with underflow, 
the result is simply treated as zero. This means that the sign of the result is lost, 
since zero has no sign, and that a future division may report a divide by zero error. 


Floating Point Addition and Subtraction. 


These operations are more complicated than multiplication and division. To add or 
subtract two floating point values it is necessary to divide the significand of the 
smaller number to make the exponents the same. Using the example decimal 
system the following addition : 


3.14159 x 10° + 4.53999 x 10° 
requires the second significand to be divided so that the sum is : 
3.14159 x 10° + 0.0000453999 x 10° 
giving 3.141635399 x 10°, which when rounded to six digits is 3.14164 x 10°. 


The problem with addition and subtraction is that when the numbers do not have 
similar exponents (ie when they are not of a similar size) some significance is lost. 
In the example above the result of the operation would have been the same if the 
smaller value had been 5 x 10°, so most of the digits in the smaller number have 
simply been ignored! The actual error introduced in this case is .46001 x 10-5 
which is a relative error of approximately 1.5 x 10~. This is not a serious problem 
for a single addition, but can badly affect multiple additions, so that, for example: 
3.14159 x 10° 

+ 4.53999 x 10-5 + 4.53999 x 10-5 + 4.53999 x 10-5 + 4.53999 x 10-5 + 4.53999 x 10-5 

+ 4.53999 x 10-5 + 4.53999 x 10°5 + 4.53999 x 10-5 + 4.53999 x 10-5 + 4.53999 x 10-5 
gives 3.14209 x 10°, while : 

3.14159 x 10° + (4.53999 x 10°5x 10) 


gives 3.14204 x 10°, which is closer to the true value, and visibly different to the 
result of multiple additions. 





428 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix X: Binary Floating Point Arithmetic 





Furthermore, when adding or subtracting values of quite different size the error in 
the representation of the larger may become more significant. Thus, adding two 
values x and y gives: 

(x x (1+¢, )) + (y x (1+¢, )) 
which is : 

(x+y + xxe, + yxe,) x (1+, ) 
where the (1+€, ) term reflects the error in rounding the result. The relative errors 
are all of similar size. If y is small compared to x, then the term xxe, becomes 
substantial compared to y, with an unfortunate effect on the significance of the 
result. In the example above the actual error in the representation of 
3.1415926535897932 is -0.26535897932 x 10-5, which is similar in size to the 
4.53999 x 10-5 which was being added! 


Floating point subtraction of values of similar size can produce still more 
unpleasant effects. Consider two positive numbers x and y, of similar size. 
Subtracting the floating point versions can be written as: 


(x X (1+€,)) -— (y x (1+€,)) 
and the result is : 

(x-y + xxe, ) — yxe,) X (1+, ) 
where the (1+e, ) term reflects the error in rounding the result. Now x—y is small 
(because x and y are of similar size) so that despite the fact that ¢, and ¢€, are small 
xxe, and yxe, may be large compared to the true result. Using the same decimal 
system used above, the following ilustrates this point: 


3.1415926535897932 — 3.1414379573205291 = 1.546962692641 x 10-4 
becomes : 

3.14159 x 10° — 3.14144 x 10° = 1.50000 x 10+ 
which is a relative error of in excess of 3 x 10°?! 


2. Decimal Fractions and Binary Floating Point 


As pointed out in various parts of this manual, many (indeed most) decimal 
fractions simply do not have exact representations in binary. The deceptively 
simple decimal fraction .1, for example, is the recuring binary fraction 
.000110011001100110011...! When such a decimal fraction is converted to binary 
it is rounded to the nearest representable value. While the result is precise to within 
the limits given for the form of number, it is not exactly the original fraction. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 429 





Appendix X: Binary Floating Point Arithmetic 





When fractional values are printed by Mallard the binary numbers are converted to 
decimal, which involves rounding to either 7 or 16 significant decimal digits. The 
inexactness of the representation may, therefore, be hidden. Furthermore, it is 
possible that values which are actually different will produce the same result when 
printed — the difference may only come to light if the values are compared or 
subtracted. It is quite easy to produce examples where the original inexact 
representation is compounded by arithmetic operations. Thus: 


PRINT 5 - (0.49 * 10) 

produces: 0.0999999 

which is very close to the true result of 0.1, but is not precisely the same ! Note that 
this example demonstrates two effects. The first is that the binary floating point 
representation of 0.49 is very slightly larger than its true value. The second is that 
the subtraction of two values of similar size tends to amplify any existing errors. If 
the same example is converted to double length then: 


PRINT 5# - (0.49# * 10) 
produces: 9.999999999999998D-02 
which is even closer to the true result, but not quite there! 


It is important to understand that this and related effects are a direct consequence of 
the use of binary floating point. This is not a fault in Mallard BASIC’s arithmetic, 
all binary floating point systems work this way. It is possible to perform decimal 
floating point arithmetic on computers. Mallard BASIC uses binary floating point 
simply because the computers used are more suited to it, and therefore the binary 
floating point operations are substatially faster than their decimal equivalents. 


The ROUND function is provided to round a value to a given number of decimal 
places. So the examples above can be modified thus: 

PRINT ROUND(5 - (0.49 * 10), 6) produces: 0.1 
PRINT ROUND (5# - (0.49# * 10), 16) produces: 0.1 

Note that rounding to a particular number of decimal places is not necessarily the 
same as rounding to a particular number of significant digits. For example the 
number 0.00017236 rounded to four decimal places is 0.0002, but rounded to four 
significant digits is 0.0001724. There is no built-in function to round to a number 
of significant digits, but the following user defined function may be used: 

DEF FNs# (x#,n) = VAL (DECS (x#,"+."+STRINGS (n, "#") +0044") ) 

which rounds the value x# to n significant decimal digits. 

For loops should not be used with fractional steps. The command FOR i=0 TO 
100 STEP 0.1 produces is which are increasingly far from the value intended, 


with the last value of 99.99905. To get the desired effect something like FOR 
ii=0 TO 1000 : i=ii/10 should be used. 


430 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix X: Binary Floating Point Arithmetic 


3. Binary Floating Point and Financial 
Calculations 


Floating point in general, and binary floating point in particular, are not ideally 
suited to financial calculations. While scientific and engineering calculations are 
quite happy with results which are accurate to a given number of significant digits, 
most financial calculations must be exact. The programmer must, therefore, take 
steps to ensure that the results of operations on money values are indeed exact. The 
following are recommended : 


a. Use Double Precision Arithmetic. 


Mallard BASIC’s single precision arithmetic provides some 7 significant 
decimal digits. This is fine for relatively small sums, but £10,000.00p already 
contains 7 significant digits — so calculations involving these amounts of 
money are already at the limits of single precision. Meaningful quantities of 
Italian Lire definitely require double precision. 


The DEFDBL command may be used to set all variables which do not have an 
explicit type to be double precision (the default is for these to be single 
precision). Constants in a program may be declared to be double precision by 
appending the ‘#’ type marker. This is most important, because there is a real 
difference between 0.1 and 0.1#. The first is a single precision value, the 
second is a double precision value, thus : 

af = 0.1 

b# = 0.1# 


PRINT a# - b# 
gives: 1.490116119037821D-09 


which reflects the difference in precision between the two representations. 


b. Use ROUND. 


Where the result of a calculation is a sum of money, then ROUND should be 
used to round to the required number of decimal places (typically 2). For 
example : 
at 90.92# +87.14# +15.84# +21.25+ +74.61# 
b# = 289.76# 
PRINT a#, b# - a#, b# - ROUND (a#, 2) 
gives: 289.76 7.105427357601002D-15 0 


which demonstrates what can happen when adding a column of figures 
together and reconciling it with a figure, which has been calculated in a 
different way. The difference is minute, but the extra ROUND step ensures 
that it is actually zero. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 431 


Appendix X: Binary Floating Point Arithmetic 


c. Beware of Rounding 


If the five values used above are treated as prices, which are to be discounted 
by 45% then adding together the rounded discounted prices gives the result 
159.38. Unfortunately applying the same discount to the rounded total of the 
original prices gives 159.37! This effect is nothing to do with the floating point 
arithmetic. Both results are correct, reflecting two different approaches to the 
problem of discounting multiple items. 


4. Binary Floating Point and Scientific/Engineering 
Calculations 


Floating point is well suited to these sorts of problems. Where results are required 
to four or five significant decimal digits single precision arithmetic should be 
adequate. Where greater accuracy is required double precision is recommended, 
though very careful use of single precision can provide up to seven significant 
decimal digits. (Note, however, that the built-in arithmetic functions force their 
arguments to single precision and produce single precision results.) 


The analysis of errors arising during floating point arithmetic is touched on in the 
Brief Introduction to Floating Point Arithmetic above. The following 
recommendations do not obviate the need for the careful design of complex 
numerical algorithms, but should help with simple problems : 


a. Do not test for equality. 


It is very unlikely that the statement(s) after the THEN in IF x = 7.41 
THEN ... will ever be executed — unless the value 7.41 is assigned directly to x! 
The alternatives are to round x so that the test takes into account the acceptable 
margins of error for the problem, or to test that x lies in some range suitable to 
the problem. 


b. Beware of subtractions of values of similar size. 


As explained above these can produce quite badly flawed results, because any 
errors in the operands can be hugely magnified. It may be necessary to 
examine the result of a subtraction, and treat it as zero if its absolute value is 
less than some minimum suitable to the problem (ROUND may be used to do 
this, as well). 


c. Beware of repeated additions. 


Because each addition can contribute a rounding error to the result it is best to 
either use a single addition of a value which is multiplied up, or use double 
precision for the repeated operations. 


432 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Appendix X: Binary Floating Point Arithmetic 


d. Beware of INT and FIX. 


These functions produce integers from floating point values. They are very 
literal minded, for example INT(2.1 — 0.1) gives 1, as does INT(2. 1# — 0.1#) ! 
This is because the errors in the representation of 2.1 and 0.1 conspire to make 
the result of the subtraction just short of 2, so INT truncates the value to 1. 
(Note that simply printing the result of the subtraction produces the value 2, 
because there is further rounding in the binary to decimal conversion.) The 
FIX function is equally brutal. The solution, as ever, lies in examining the 
levels of accuracy required by the problem and applying them — for example 
INT(ROUND(x, 5)) may be suitable for some applications. 


e. Beware of addition and subtraction of values of widely differing sizes. 


Adding a small number to a much larger one can lead to loss of significance. 
This can be demonstrated by (0.2 + 100000) — 100000 which gives 0.203125, 
which represents a large relative error. These effects may be mitigated by 
using double precision. 





Mallard BASIC: Reference 433 


434 Mallard BASIC: Reference 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 


Index 


Abandon editing, 150 
Abandoning a program, 44 
ABS, 54, 199 
Absolute value, 199 
Addition, 5, 136 
ADDKEY, 106, 200 
ADDREC, 97, 202 
Address 
highest used, 389 
Address of variables, 379 
address-expression, 195 
Allocating memory 
for keyed access files, 93, 206 
machine code programs, 117 
Amending programs, 244 
AND, 43, 55, 139 
Arc-tangent, 204 
Arithmetic, 5, 53, 153 
Arrays, 24 
dimensions, 24, 241 
elements, 24 
erase, 248 
initialisation, 24, 338 
lower bound, 133, 315 
subscripts, 133 
variable, 133 
array-variable-name, 195 
ASC, 59, 203 
ASCII character set, 23, 421 
Assignment, 281 
ATN, 54, 204 
AUTO, 11, 145, 205 


Based numbers, 21, 130, 132 
BASIC 

leaving, 1 

starting, 1 


Mallard BASIC 


Bitwise operations, 55 
Branching, 41 
Break, 142, 146 
see also Control-C 
resume after, 222 
BUFFERS, 93, 206 
Built-in functions, 139 


CALL, 119, 208, 400 
Carriage return 
in sequential files, 177 
CD, 175, 209 
CDBL, 60, 210 
CHAIN, 211 
CHAIN MERGE, 211 
Character set, 129, 421 
Characters 
ASCII values, 203 
convert to integer, 59, 203 
input from keyboard, 19 
internal value, 23 
literal, 148 
CHDIR, 175, 213 
CHDIR$, 175, 214 
CHR$, 59, 215 
CINT, 60, 216 
CLEAR, 187, 217 
Clear variables except common, 
220 
CLOSE, 68, 177, 218 
Codes 
escape sequences, 29 
for printer control, 34 
for screen control, 29 
Comma 
in print command, 164 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 





Command Editor, 415 
Command line parameters, 389 
Command structure, 2 
Commands 
console I/O, 154 
constant data, 158 
control structures, 153 
conversion to upper case, 129 
creation of programs, 151 
definition of terms, 195 
directory access, 156 
error trapping, 160 
file input and output, 155 
keyed files, 188 
machine level, 160 
output to printer, 155 
overview, 151 
program development, 161 
program termination, 152 
random access files, 157 
running programs, 152 
sequential files, 156 
structure, 127 
syntax, 195 
variables, 154 
Comments, 37, 339 
COMMON, 219 
COMMON RESET, 220 
Computed GOSUB, 311 
Computed GOTO, 311 
Concatenating strings, 56, 137 
Conditionals, 41, 269 
Consistent files, 221 
Console 
input fixed length string, 275 
input line, 282 
output data, 386 
position, 331 
trap input, 318 
trap output, 323 
width of, 384 


Console I/O, 154 
CONSOLIDATE, 183, 221 
Constants, 3, 16, 231, 338, 343 
CONT, 44, 222 
Continuation records, 79 
Control codes, 23, 29, 169 
interpretation, 170 
specification, 170 
Control variable, 261 
Control-A, 127, 145 
Control-C, 127, 142, 146, 153 
disable, 324 
enable, 325 
resume after, 222 
Control-S, 127, 142, 153 
disable, 324 
enable, 325 
Conversion functions, 59 
COS, 54, 223 
Cosine, 223 
CREATE, 224 
Creation of programs, 151 
CSNG, 60, 225 
Current directory 
changing, 209, 213 
returning current directory, 214 
Current position, 186 
Cursor control, 29 
CVD, 83, 180, 226 
CVI, 83, 180, 227 
CVIK, 228 
CVS, 83, 180, 229 
CVUK, 230 


DATA, 16, 231 
disc files, 20, 61 
disc storage, 61 
entry from the keyboard, 17 
Data base programs, 89 
writing, 91 
Data files, 90, 181 


Mallard BASIC 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 


Data formats, 397 
Data records, 76 
Data types, 131 
conversion, 134 
Debugging, 373 
DEC$, 232 
Decimal fractions, 429 
Decimals, 21 
DEF FN, 50, 139, 233 
DEF SEG, 234 
DEF USR, 120, 235 
Defaults, 389 
disc drive, 317 
user number, 317 
variable type, 132, 236 
DEFDBL, 236 
DEFINT, 236 
DEFSNG, 236 
DEFSTR, 236 
DEL, 62, 175, 237 
DELETE, 13, 238 
Delete files, 237, 247, 278 
DELETE option, 211 
Deleting program lines, 13, 238 
DELKEY, 102, 107, 239 
DIM, 25, 241 
Dimensions of an array, 24, 133, 
241 
DIR, 62, 174, 242 
Direct mode, 127, 141 
special run only, 142 
Directory, 242, 258 
changing current directory, 
209, 213 
create new directory, 296, 302 
directory lookup, 259 
listing, 257 
remove directory, 337, 347 
returning current directory, 214 
tree-structured, 175 


Mallard BASIC 


Directory access, 156 
Directory operations, 174 
Disc commands, 62, 174 
Discs 
changing, 342 
DISPLAY, 243 
Displaying programs, 11 
Division, 5 
by zero, 137 
Double Length values, 131, 174, 210 
exact representation, 140 
in random records, 226, 301 
output, 165 
Double precision numbers, 22 
drive-spec, 198 
Duplicate keys, 336 


EDIT, 145, 244 
Editing programs, 12 
keystrokes, 13 
Editor, 141, 145 
installing, 409 
leaving, 149 
Elements of an array, 24 
ELSE, 42, 269 
END, 44, 245 
resume after, 222 
End of file, 67, 246 
End of line, 177 
EOF, 67, 246 
in sequential files, 178 
EQV, 139 
ERA, 62, 175, 247 
ERASE, 248 
Erasing files, 175, 237, 247, 278 
ERL, 249 
ERR, 250 
ERROR, 251 
Error processing mode, 142, 312, 344 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 





Errors 
error messages, 391 
error numbers, 250, 391 
force from program, 251 
from operating system, 327 
keyed files, 192 
error line number, 249 
resume execution, 344 
trapping, 160, 312 
ESC, 29 
Escape sequences, 29 
Exiting from BASIC, 1, 370 
EXP, 54, 252 
Exponential, 252 
Exponentiation, 136 
Exponents, 54 
formatted printing, 168 
Expressions, 5 
evaluation of, 5 
logical, 138 
numeric, 135 
relational, 55, 137 
string, 137 
expression, 195 
External functions, 120, 140, 235, 377 
entry and exit conditions, 398 
External routines, 208, 397 


F: command line parameter, 389 
FETCHKEY, 253 
FETCHRANK, 254 
FETCHREC, 255 
FIELD, 78, 179, 256 
Field variables, 78 
assigning information, 79 
File handling 
examples, 69, 84, 112 
overview, 173 
File lock, 176 
File names, 174 
file name lookup, 258 


file-name, 195 
file-name-expression, 195 
File numbers, 176 
file-number-expression, 195 
file-reference, 195 
FILES, 174, 257 
Files 
closing, 176, 218 
current record number, 286 
deleting, 62, 237 
directory, 242, 257, 258 
displaying contents, 62, 243 
erasing, 175, 247, 278 
indexed, 89 
input data, 274 
input fixed length string, 275 
input line, 283 
input random record, 264 
keyed access, 89, 181 
length of file, 288 
listing, 62 
locking, 183 
maximum number open 
simultaneously, 63, 217, 297, 389 
opening, 176, 313 
output data, 333, 387 
output to console, 243, 374 
random access, 76, 178 
records, 76 
renaming, 62, 175, 307, 340 
sequential, 63, 177 
FIND$, 62, 174, 258 
FINDDIR$, 175, 259 
Finish using BASIC, 1 
FIX, 60, 260 
Floating point numbers, 22, 131 
convert to integer, 60 
exact representation of, 140 
Floating point arithmetic 
inaccuracy, 26, 425 
warnings, 425 


Mallard BASIC 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 


Flow of control, 38 

EN, 233 

FOR, 39, 261 

Formatted printing, 166 

Free format printing, 165 

Format template, 28 

FRE function, 263 

Free space, 263 

Functions, 6, 50, 139, 377 
arithmetic, 6, 158 
call, 50 
define external function, 235 
external functions, 120, 398 
machine level, 160 
overview, 151 
parameters, 50 
position in program, 50 
string, 6, 159 
trigonometric, 54, 423 
type conversion, 159 
user defined, 50, 233 


Garbage collection, 263 
Generation number, 183 
GET, 82, 179, 264 
GOSUB, 47, 265 
GOTO, 39, 47, 266 

in IF command, 269 
GSX routines, 122 
Guard record, 407 


Halt, 142 

HEX$ function, 267 
Hexadecimal numbers, 21 
Hexadecimal value, 267 
Highest address used, 389 
HIMEM, 117, 268 


I/O port, 271, 328, 381 
IF, 41, 269 
sequence of options, 42 


IMP, 139 
Index files, 90, 181 
index-position, 197 
Information storage 
in keyed access files, 97 
in random records, 79 
on disc, 61 
Initialising BASIC, 389 
INKEY$, 19, 270 
INP, 271 
INPUT, 18, 272 
Input 
characters, 19 
from console, 154, 272, 275, 282 
from disc files, 20 
from I/O port, 271 
from keyboard, 17, 270 
from random record, 274, 275, 283 
from sequential file, 
156, 274, 275, 283 
numbers, 18 
prompted, 272 
strings, 19 
INPUT #, 65, 274 
with random files, 179 
INPUT $, 275 
INPW, 271 
Installation of BASIC, 409, 411 
INSTR, 58, 276 
INT, 60, 277 
Integer division, 136 
Integer modulus, 136 
Integers, 21, 131 
convert to character, 59 
convert to floating point, 60 
convert to hexadecimal, 267 
convert to octal, 310 
in random records, 227, 303 
range, 130 
use as keys, 228, 230, 304, 306 





Mallard BASIC 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 





integer-expression, 195 
Iteration, 44, 261 


Jetsam 
see also Keyed access files 
red tape, 316 
Joining strings, 56 
Jumps (in programs), 39, 265, 266 


Key value, 181 

key-value, 197 

Keyboard 
input characters, 270 
input from, 17 
installation, 410 

Keyed access files, 89, 405 
adding extra keys, 106, 200 
adding records, 95, 191, 202 
allocating memory, 93 
build record, 294, 299, 350 
change lock, 287 
changing an entry, 108 
changing the key, 107 
closing, 91, 103, 189 
consistent files, 182, 221 
creating, 91, 188, 224 
current key rank, 254 
current key value, 253 
current position, 90, 186 
current record number, 255 
defining records, 94 
deleting a key, 239 
deleting a record, 101, 191, 239 
duplicate keys, 336 
errors, 192 
example, 112 
generation number, 183 
input record, 264 
integer keys, 228, 230, 304, 306 
locks, 90, 183 





maximum record length, 187 
multiuser, 407 
opening, 94, 189, 313 
output record, 334 
overview, 181 
rank, 97, 182 
reading a record, 99, 190 
record length, 94 
reserved bytes, 316 
restore record, 358 
restrictions, 187 
return codes, 192 
seek record, 354, 355, 356, 359 
set memory space, 206 
storing information, 97 
writing, 190 
Keyed file, 181 
Keys, 89, 97 
adding extra keys, 106, 191, 200 
changing the key, 107 
current rank, 254 
current value, 253 
deleting, 101, 191, 239 
duplicate keys, 336 
finding keys, 191 
integer values, 228 
numeric values, 405 
representation of integer values, 
230, 304, 306 
sets, 111 
subkeys, 406 
Keywords, 2, 129 
summary, 403 
KILL, 175, 278 


LEFTS, 56, 279 
LEN, 280 
LET, 281 
Line feed 
in sequential files, 177 


Mallard BASIC 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 


LINE INPUT, 282 
keystrokes, 146 
LINE INPUT #, 283 
Line numbers, 11, 205 
automatic, 11 
Line-number, 130, 196 
line-number-range, 196 
LIST, 12, 284 
List-of, 128 
Listing programs, 11, 174 
Literal characters, 148 
LLIST, 284 
LOAD, 285 
Loading programs from disc, 
10, 152, 285 
LOC, 286 
LOCK, 287 
Locks, 176, 197 
failure, 194 
file locks, 183 
record locks, 183 
temporary, 185 
LOF, 288 
LOG, 54, 289 
LOG10, 54, 290 
Logarithms, 54, 289, 290 
Logical expressions, 41, 138 
logical-expression, 138, 196 
Logical operators, 138 
Logical position, 164 
Loops, 38, 153 
FOR loops, 39, 261 
nesting, 262 
WHILE loop, 44, 382, 383 
LOWERS$, 291 
LPOS, 292 
LPRINT, 163, 293 
LSET, 79, 180, 294 


Mallard BASIC 


M: command line parameter, 389 
Machine code programs, 115 
call, 119 
examples, 120 
loading, 118 
using, 119 
Machine level operations, 115 
MAX, 56, 295 
Maximum value, 295 
MD, 175, 296 
MEMORY, 117, 187, 297 
Memory location 
reading, 329 
writing, 330 
MERGE, 211, 298 
Merging programs, 211 
protected programs, 212, 298 
Metalanguage, 128 
MID$, 56, 79, 180, 299 
MIN, 56, 300 
Minimum value, 300 
MKDS$, 80, 180, 301, 405 
MKDIR, 175, 302 
MKIS$, 80, 180, 303 
MKIK$, 304, 405 
MKSS, 80, 180, 305, 405 
MKUKS, 306, 405 
MOD, 53, 136 
Modes 
of operating BASIC, 142 
Modulus, 136 
Multiplication, 5 
Multiuser versions, 181, 183, 405 
open files, 314 
random files, 407 
sequential files, 406 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 





NAME, 175, 307 
Names, 129 
of variables, 3, 132 
path names, 198 
upper & lower case, 20 
variable names, 20 
Natural logarithm, 289 
Nesting 
of loops, 262 
of subroutines, 265 
NEW, 308 
NEXT, 39, 261, 309 
NOT, 43, 55, 139 
Null characters, 131 
Numbers, 22, 130 
absolute value of, 54 
arithmetic, 53 
based, 21 
convert to string, 59 
floating point, 22 
hexadecimal, 21 
in random records, 80 
input from keyboard, 18 
maximum and minimum values, 56 
octal, 21 
precision, 22 
random, 55 
scaled, 21 
sign of, 54 
type conversion, 134 
unscaled, 21 
unsigned integer, 135 
variables, 3 
Numeric expressions, 135 
Numeric values, 131 
convert to character, 215 
convert to double length, 210 
convert to formatted string, 232 
convert to hexadecimal, 267 
convert to integer, 216, 277, 375 


convert to octal, 310 

convert to single length, 225 

convert to string, 366 

exact representation, 140 

formatted printing, 167 

in random access files, 180 

output, 165 

rounding, 134, 349 

sign of, 360 

truncate, 260 
numeric-constant, 196 
numeric-expression, 196 
numeric-variable, 196 


OCT$, 310 
Octal numbers, 21 
Octal values, 310 
ON ERROR GOTO, 312 
ON expression, 311 
ON GOSUB, 48, 311 
ON GOTO, 42, 311 
OPEN, 63, 176, 313 
Operating system, 380 
return to, 1 
Operators, 5 
arithmetic, 53 
logical, 138 
’ On numeric expressions, 136 
precedence, 5, 136 
relational, 43, 138 
string, 138 
OPTION BASE, 315 
OPTION FIELD, 316 
OPTION FILES, 317 
OPTION INPUT, 318 
OPTION LPRINT, 321 
OPTION NOT TAB, 32, 171, 322 
OPTION PRINT, 323 
OPTION RUN, 153, 324 
OPTION STOP, 153, 325 


Mallard BASIC 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 


OPTION TAB, 326 

OR, 43, 55, 139 

OSERR, 327 

OUT, 328 

Output, 27, 163 
files on console, 374 
record to random files, 334 
spaces, 363 
to console, 154, 332 
to I/O port, 328 
to random record, 333, 387 
to sequential file, 157, 333, 387 
to the console, 386 
to the printer, 34, 155, 293 
to the screen, 27 

OUTW, 328 

Overflow, 137 
in formatted printing, 168 

Overlaying programs, 211 


Parameters 
command line, 389 
Patches, 115 
path, 198 
Path names, 198 
PEEK, 329 
POKE, 116, 330 
POS, 331 
Precedence 
logical operators, 138 
numeric operators, 5, 136 
Precision of numeric values, 131 
PRINT, 27, 163, 332 
Print 
see also Output 
separators, 27 
spaces, 363 
PRINT #, 64, 163, 333 
with random files, 179 
Print functions, 28 


Print items, 164 
PRINT USING, 29, 332 
Print zones, 28, 165 
set size, 388 
Printer 
output data, 155, 293 
position, 292 
trap output, 321 
width of, 385 
Printer control, 34, 169 
codes, 34 
Diablo 630 codes, 35 
FX-80 codes, 36 
Printing 
columns, 29 
control character handling, 164 
exponents, 168 
field overflow, 168 
files, 243 
formatted, 28, 166 
logical position, 164 
numeric values, 165 
signed numbers, 168 
spaces, 166 
template for, 28 
Procedures, 46, 265 
Program lines 
delete, 238 
Program mode, 127, 141, 142 
Programming 
design, 15, 37 
top down, 48 
Programs 
ASCII format, 353 
automatic numbering, 205 
chaining, 211 
changing, 12, 141, 145, 244 
comments, 37 
conditional flow of control, 269 
continuing after stopping, 44, 222 
decisions, 40 





Mallard BASIC 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 


deleting from program lines, 149 
deleting program lines, 
13, 141, 145 
designing, 15 
designing using modules, 48 
displaying, 11, 284 
editing, 12, 141, 145, 244 
ending, 245 
first steps, 9 
flow of control, 38 
input, 141 
jumps, 39 
line numbers, 11 
loading from disc, 10, 152, 285 
loops, 39 
machine code, 115 
merging, 298 
output to printer, 284 
overlaying, 211 
prepare for new program, 308 
protected, 353 
renumbering, 13, 341 
running, 10, 152, 351, 352 
save on disc, 353 
screen lines, 147 
stopping, 44, 245 
storing on disc, 10 
structure, 37, 45 
termination, 152 
writing a data base program, 91 
writing programs, 37 
Prompt string, 19 
Protected programs, 353 
Pseudo random numbers, 55 
PUT, 81, 179, 334 


Quote marks, 23 
quoted-string, 196 


Random access files, 76, 178 
build record, 294, 299, 350 
change lock, 287 
changing, 84 
closing, 81, 83 
creating, 77 
data from record, 279, 346 
defining the record format, 179, 256 
double length values, 226, 301 
examples, 84 
input record, 264 
layout of data, 78 
multiuser, 407 
opening, 77, 82, 313 
output record, 334 
reading, 81, 82 
records, 76 
writing records to disc, 81 

Random numbers, 55, 348 
set seed, 335 

RANDOMIZE, 335 

Rank, 97, 182, 197, 357 

RANKSPEC, 336 

RD, 175, 337 

READ, 16, 338 
see also Input 

Record buffer, 78, 178 

Record length 
initialise, 217 
keyed access files, 94 
random access files, 78 
set in OPEN, 313 

Record locking, 183, 206 

record-number, 196 

Record number, 77, 181 
current record, 255 

Record size, 178 


Mallard BASIC 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 





Records, 76 
add to keyed file, 202 
changing the data in, 299, 350 
continuation records, 79 
defining, 78, 256 
delete keyed, 239 
find by key, 186 
input random record, 264 
maximum record length, 297 
putting information in, 79 
seek by key, 354 
seek different key, 359 
seek next, 355 
seek previous, 356 
writing to disc, 81 
Relational operators, 55 
relational-operator, 137 
relational-expression, 137 
REM, 37, 339 
Remarks, 37 
REN, 62, 175, 340 
Rename disc files, 175, 307, 340 
RENUM, 13, 341 
Renumbering programs, 13, 341 
RESET, 62, 174, 342 
Reset disc, 62 
RESTORE, 16, 343 
RESUME, 344 
RETURN, 345 
Return codes, 192 
RIGHTS, 56, 346 
RMDIR, 175, 347 
RND, 348 
ROUND, 60, 349 
Rounding, 60, 134 
RSET, 79, 180, 350 
RUN, 351, 352 
Run-only, 127, 142 
Running programs, 10, 152 


Mallard BASIC 


S: command line parameter, 389 
SAVE, 353 
scaled-number, 130, 132 
Scaled numbers, 21 
Screen 

displaying data on, 27 

installation, 410 
Screen control, 30, 169 

codes, 29 

VTS2 screen, 30 

other types of screen, 33 
Screen lines, 147 
Screen-based editor 

controls, 147 

insert, 148 

overstrike, 148 
Searching strings, 58 
SEEKKEY, 99, 354 
SEEKNEXT, 111, 355 
SEEKPREV, 111, 356 
SEEKRANK, 357 
SEEKREC, 358 
SEEKSET, 111, 359 
Segments 

define base, 234 
Segment registers, 402 
Semicolon 

in print command, 164 
Sequential files, 63, 177 

changing, 68 

closing, 68 

creating, 63 

example, 69 

multiuser, 406 

opening, 63, 313 

reading, 65 

writing, 64 
SGN, 54, 360 
Signs 

formatted printing, 168 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 
a 


Single Length values 
output, 165 
simple-variable, 196 
SIN, 54, 361 
Sine, 361 
Single Length values, 131 
exact representation, 140 
in random records, 229, 305 
Single precision numbers, 22 
SPACES, 57, 362 
SPC, 28, 166, 332, 363 
SQR, 364 
Square root, 364 
Stack 
initialisation, 217 
Stack size, 297 
Starting BASIC, 1 
Statements, 127 
Step size, 261 
STOP, 44, 365 
resume after, 222 
Stopping a program, 44 
Storing information 
in the program, 16 
on disc, 10 
STR$ function, 366 
Strings, 23, 131 
= operator, 138 
concatenation of, 137 
convert to double length 
numeric, 226 
convert to integer, 227, 228 
convert to lower case, 58, 291 
convert to numeric values, 59, 378 
convert to single length integer, 
229, 230 
convert to upper case, 58, 376 
equality, 138 
generating, 57 
input from keyboard, 19 





joining, 5, 56 

left justify, 294 

length of, 57, 280 

of repeated character, 367 

of spaces, 362 

operators, 5 

right justify, 350 

searching, 58 

splitting, 57 

substrings, 276, 279, 299, 346 

variables, 3, 23 

with bit 7 stripped, 368 
string-constant, 131 
string-expression, 137, 197 
String functions, 159 
string-function, 137 
string-item, 137 
String variables, 56 
string-variable, 137, 197 
STRINGS, 57, 367 
STRIP$ function, 368 
Structure of programs, 37 
SUB control character 

in sequential files, 178 
Subkeys, 406 
Subroutines, 46, 345 

call, 265 

calling external subroutines, 

208, 400 

external subroutines, 397 

flow, 50 

for console input, 318 

for output to console, 323 

for output to printer, 321 

position in program, 48 
Substrings, 56, 276, 279, 299, 346 
Subtraction, 5, 136 
Suspend BASIC, 142 
SWAP, 369 


Mallard BASIC 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 


Syntax error 

entry to editor, 145 

in run only system, 145 
SYSTEM, 1, 370 


TAB, 28, 166, 332, 371 

in sequential files, 178 
Tab expansion 

disable, 322 

enable, 326 
TAN, 54, 372 
Template 

format (printing), 28, 167 
Temporary write lock, 185 
Text strings, 23 
THEN, 41, 269 
Toggle insert/overstrike, 148 
Top down programming, 48 
Tracing, 373 
Tree-structured directories, 175 
Trigonometry, 54, 423 


TROFF, 373 
TRON, 373 
Truncation of numeric values, 
60, 134, 260 
TYPE, 62, 374 


Type conversion, 159 
integer/floating point, 60 
integer/string, 59 

Type-marker, 132, 197 


Unary minus, 136 

Unary plus, 136 

Unscaled numbers, 21 
unscaled-number, 130, 132 
Unsigned integer values, 135 

UNT function, 375 

UPPER$ function, 376 

User defined functions, 50, 139, 233 


User segment, 234 
USING, 29, 166, 332 
USR functions, 120, 235, 377, 398 


VAL, 59, 378 
variable, 197 
variable-name, 197 
Variables, 132 
address of, 379 
clear all values, 217 
clear except common, 220 
control variable, 261 
declaration of, 133 
in subroutine, 48 
initialising, 231, 338 
life of, 21 
names, 3, 20, 129 
numeric, 3 
set default type, 236 
shared between programs, 211, 219 
string, 3, 23, 56 
swap values, 369 
VARPTR, 379 
VERSION, 153, 380 


WAIT, 381 
WAITW, 381 
WEND, 382 
WHILE, 383 
White space, 129 
Widening 
of values, 134 
WIDTH, 384, 255, 171 
WIDTH LPRINT, 385, 255, 171 
Wild cards (in file names), 174 
WRITE, 386 
Write 
see also Output 
WRITE #, 64, 387 





Mallard BASIC 


Bold numbers refer to the Introduction; Light numbers to the Reference 


XOR operator, 139 


ZONE, 388 
Zones, 27, 165 
set size, 388 


‘37 : 
4 operator, 136 
4 print format, 167, 168 
! print format, 167 

! type marker, 22, 132 
# print format, 167 

# type marker, 22, 132 
$ print format, 168 

$ type marker, 23, 132 
& print format, 167 

% type marker, 22, 132 
* operator, 53, 136 

* print format, 168 

+ operator, 53, 136 

+ print format, 168 

on strings, 137 

- operator, 53, 136 

- print format, 168 

/ operator, 53, 136 

\ operator, 136 

\ print format, 167 

. print format, 167 





Mallard BASIC 


Mallard BASIC 


Part 1: Introduction to Mallard BASIC 
eo Easy to read introduction to programming your PCW in BASIC 
— How to store and manipulate data using BASIC 


— Detailed chapters on sequential files, random files and 
“Jetsam” keyed files 


— Worked examples of BASIC programs 


— including a simple database 


Part 2: Reference to Mallard BASIC 
— Detailed explanation of commands and concepts 
— Complete A-Z of BASIC commands and functions 


— Technical appendices including trigonometrical functions and 
details of BASIC arithmetic 


MAY 89 


ISBN 1 85195 009 5 
LOCOMOTIVE 
SOFTWARE 9178185 1"'950096 




